THE
ENGLISH
NEW TESTAMENT
FROM THE GREEK TEXT
AS ESTABLISHED BY
BIBLE NUMERICS


ACCORDING TO MATTHEW

Chapter 1
1 A GENEALOGY of Jesus Christ, David’s Son, Abraham’s Son.
2 Abraham begat :Isaac,
Isaac in turn begat :Jacob,
Jacob in turn begat :Judah and his :brethren,
3 Judah in turn begat :Phares and :Zara of :Thamar,
Phares in turn begat :Hesrōm,
Hesrom in turn begat :Aram,
4 Aram in turn begat :Aminadab,
Aminadab in turn begat :Naassōn,
Naasson in turn begat :Salmōn,
5 Salmon in turn begat :Boes of :Rachab,
Boes in turn begat :Iōbēd of :Ruth,
Iobed in turn begat :Jessai,
6 Jessai in turn begat :David the king.
David in turn begat :Solomōn of the wife of :Uriah,
7 Solomon in turn begat :Roboam,
Roboam in turn begat :Abija,
Abija in turn begat :Asaph,
8 Asaph in turn begat :Jōsaphat,
Josaphat in turn begat :Jōram,
Joram in turn begat :Oziah,
9 Oziah in turn begat :Jōatham,
Joatham in turn begat :Achas,
Achas in turn begat :Hezekiah,
10 Hezekiah in turn begat :Manassēh,
Manasseh in turn begat :Amōs,
Amos in turn begat :Jōsiah,
11 Josiah in turn begat :Jechoniah and his :brethren at the time of the
Babylōn removal.
12 After the Babylon removal Jechoniah in turn begets :Salathiēl,
Salathiel in turn begets :Zorobabel,
13 Zorobabel in turn begets :Abioud,
Abioud in turn begat :Eliakeim,
Eliakeim in turn begat :Azōr,
14 Azor in turn begat :Sadōc,
Sadoc in turn begat :Acheim,
Acheim in turn begat :Elioud,
15 Elioud in turn begat :Eleazar,
Eleazar in turn begat :Maththan,
Maththan in turn begat :Jacob, 16 Jacob in turn begat :Jōsēph the husband
of Mary, of whom was begotten Jesus :called Christ.
17 All the generations therefore from Abraham till David are fourteen
generations, and from David till the Babylon removal fourteen generations,
and from the Babylon removal till the Christ fourteen generations.
18 Now the birth of :Jesus Christ was thus: His :mother Mary,
betrothed to :Joseph, before they came together, was found with child of the
Holy Spirit. 19 And Joseph her :husband being righteous, and not willing to
make an example of her, was minded to put her away privily. 20 But as he
thought on these things, lo, the Lord’s angel appeared to him in a dream,
saying, Joseph, David’s Son, fear not to take to thee Mary thy :wife: for what
is begotten in her is of the Holy Spirit. 21 And she shall bear a son, and thou
shalt call his :name :JESUS; for HE shall save his :people from their :sins.
22 Now all this is come to pass that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by
the Lord through the prophet saying,
23 Lo, the virgin shall be with child, and shall bear a son,
And they shall call his :name Emmanuēl;
which being interpreted is, :God with us. 24 And :Joseph arose from
his :sleep and did as the Lord’s angel commanded him, and took to him
his :wife, 25 and knew her not till she had borne a son; and he called
his :name JESUS.

Chapter 2
1 Now when :Jesus was born in Bēthlehem of :Judea in the days of
Hērōd the king, lo, magi from the east came to Jerusalem, saying 2 Where is
the one born king of the Jews? for we saw his :star in the east, and are
come to worship him. 3 And when Herod the king heard it, he was troubled,
and all Jerusalem with him; 4 and he gathered all the chief priests and
scribes of the people, and inquired of them where the Christ should be born.
5 And they said to him, In Bethlehem of :Judea: for thus it is written through
the prophet,
6 And thou Bethlehem, land of Judah,
Art in nowise least among the princes of Judah,
For out of thee shall come forth a governor,
Who shall shepherd my :people :Israel.
7 Then Herod privily called the magi, and learned of them exactly the time of
the appearing star; 8 and he sent them to Bethlehem, and said, Go and
search out exactly about the little child; and when ye have found it report to
me, so that I also may come and worship it. 9 And they having heard the
king, went away; and lo, the star which they saw in the east went before
them, till it came and stood over where the little child was. 10 And when they
saw the star, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy. 11 And they came into
the house and saw the little child with Mary its :mother, and they fell down
and worshipped it; and opening their :treasures they offered to him gifts,
gold and frankincense and myrrh. 12 And warned in a dream not to return to
Herod, they withdrew into their :country another way. 13 Now when they
withdrew lo, the Lord’s angel appeared to :Joseph in a dream, saying, Arise
and take the little child and his :mother, and flee into Egypt, and be there till
I tell thee; for Herod is about to seek the little child to destroy him. 14 And he
arose and took the little child and his :mother by night, and withdrew into
Egypt, 15 and was there till the death of Herod: that it might be fulfilled which
was spoken by the Lord through the prophet saying, Out of Egypt I called
my :son. 16 Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked of the magi,
was exceeding wroth, and sent forth and slew all the boys, :in Bethlehem
and in all its :borders, from two years old and under, according to the time
which he had exactly learned of the magi. 17 Then was fulfilled what was
spoken through Jeremiah the prophet, saying,
18 A voice was heard in Rama,
Weeping and much mourning,
Rachēl weeping for her :children;
And she would not be comforted because they are not.
19 But when :Herod was dead, lo, the Lord’s angel appeareth in a dream
to :Joseph in Egypt, saying, 20 Arise, and take the little child and his :mother
and go into Israēl land, for they are dead that sought the little child’s life.
21 And he arose and took the little child and his :mother, and came into
Israel land. 22 But when he heard that Archelaus was reigning over :Judea
instead of his :father Herod, he was afraid to go there; but warned in a
dream, he withdrew into the parts of :Galilee, 23 and came and dwelt in a
city called Nazareth; that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through the
prophets that he should be called Nazōrean.

Chapter 3
1 And in those :days cometh John the Baptist preaching in the
wilderness of :Judea, saying 2 Repent ye, for the kingdom of the heavens is
at hand. 3 For this is he spoken of through Isaiah the prophet, saying,
A voice of one crying in the wilderness,
Make ye ready the way of the Lord,
Make his :paths straight.
4 Now :John himself had his :raiment of camel’s hair, and a leather girdle
about his :loin; and his :food was locusts and wild honey. 5 Then went out
unto him Jerusalem and all :Judea and all the region about the Jordan;
6 and they were baptized of him in the river Jordan confessing their :sins.
7 And seeing many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to the baptism,
he said to them, Offspring of vipers, who warned you to flee from the wrath
to come? 8 Bring forth therefore fruit worthy of :repentance; 9 and think not
to say within yourselves, We have :Abraham for our father, for I say unto
you that :God can of these :stones raise up children to :Abraham. 10 And
already is the axe lying at the root of the trees: every tree therefore that
bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire. 11 I indeed
baptize you in water unto repentance: but who cometh after me is mightier
than I: whose :shoes I am not fit to bear: HE shall baptize you in the Holy
Spirit and fire: 12 whose :fan is in his :hand, and he will thoroughly cleanse
his threshing :floor and gather his :grain into the garner, but the chaff he will
burn up with unquenchable fire. 13 Then cometh :Jesus from :Galilee to
the Jordan unto :John to be baptized of him. 14 But he would fain hinder him,
saying, I have need to be baptized of thee, and THOU comest unto me?
15 But :Jesus answered and said to him, Suffer me now: for thus it
becometh us to fulfill all righteousness. Then he suffereth him.
16 And :Jesus, when baptized, went up straightway from the water: and lo,
the heavens were opened, and he saw God’s Spirit descending as if a dove
coming upon him; 17 and lo, a voice out of the heavens saying, This is
my :son the beloved in whom I am well pleased.

Chapter 4
1 Then was :Jesus led up of the Spirit into the wilderness to be
tempted of the devil. 2 And having fasted forty days and forty nights, he
afterward hungered. 3 And the tempter came and said to him, If thou
art :God’s Son, bid these stones to become loaves. 4 But he answered and
said, It is written, Not by bread alone shall :man live, but by every word that
proceedeth out of God’s mouth. 5 Then the devil taketh him into the holy
city, and set him on the pinnacle of the temple, 6 and saith to him, If thou
art :God’s Son cast thyself down: for it is written [that]
He shall give his :angels charge concerning thee:
And on their hands they shall bear thee up,
Lest haply thou dash thy :foot against a stone.
7 Said :Jesus to him, Again it is written, Thou shalt not make trial of the Lord
thy :God. 8 Again, the devil taketh him to an exceeding high mountain, and
showeth him all the kingdoms of the world and their :glory, 9 and said to him,
All these will I give thee, if thou fall down and worship me. 10 Then
saith :Jesus to him, Go, Satan: for it is written, The Lord thy :God shalt thou
worship, and him only shalt thou serve. 11 Then the devil leaveth him, and
lo, angels came and ministered to him.
12 Now when he heard that John was delivered up, he withdrew
into :Galilee; 13 and leaving :Nazareth he came and dwelt in Capernaum :by
the sea, in the borders of Zebulun and Naphtali: 14 that it might be fulfilled
what was spoken through Isaiah the prophet saying,
15 Zebulun land and Naphtali land,
By way of the sea, beyond the Jordan,
Galilee of the nations
16 The people that sitteth in darkness
Saw a great light,
And to those sitting in a region and shadow of death,
For them a light arose.
17 From then on began :Jesus to preach and to say, Repent ye, for
the kingdom of the heavens is nigh.
18 And walking by the sea of :Galilee he saw two brethren,
Simōn :called Peter, and Andrew his :brother, casting a net into the sea; for
they were fishers. 19 And he saith to them, Come after me, and I will make
you fishers of men. 20 And THEY straightway left their :nets, and followed
him. 21 And going on thence, he saw two other brethren, James the son
of :Zebedee, and John his :brother, in the boat with Zebedee their :father,
mending their :nets; and he called them. 22 And THEY straightway left the
boat and their :father, and followed him. 23 And he went about in
all :Galilee, teaching in their :synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the
kingdom, and healing every sickness and every infirmity among the people.
24 And the report of him went forth into all :Syria: and they brought to him all
that were :ill, holden with diverse diseases and torments, demoniacs, and
epileptics, and paralytics; and he healed them. 25 And great crowds
followed him from :Galilee and Decapolis and Jerusalem and Judea and
from beyond the Jordan.

Chapter 5
1 And seeing the crowds, he went up into the mountain; and when he
sat down his :disciples came to him, 2 and he opened his :mouth, and
taught them, saying,
3 Blessed the poor in :spirit, for THEIRS is the kingdom of the
heavens.
4 Blessed they that mourn, for THEY shall be comforted.
5 Blessed the meek, for THEY shall inherit the earth.
6 Blessed they that hunger and thirst after :righteousness, for THEY
shall be filled.
7 Blessed the merciful, for THEY shall obtain mercy.
8 Blessed the pure in :heart, for THEY shall see :God.
9 Blessed the peace-doers, for THEY shall be called sons of God.
10 Blessed they that have been persecuted for righteousness’ sake,
for THEIRS is the kingdom of the heavens.
11 Blessed are ye when men shall reproach you and persecute, and
say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake.
12 Rejoice, and be exceeding glad, for great is your :reward in
the heavens: for so persecuted they the prophets :before you.
13 YE are the salt of the earth, but if the salt have lost savor, wherewith shall
it be salted? it is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out and trodden
under of :men. 14 YE are the light of the world. A city set on a hill cannot be
hid. 15 Neither do men light a lamp, and put it under the bushel, but upon
the lampstand and it shineth unto all those in the house. 16 Thus let
your :light shine before :men, that they may see your good :works and
glorify your :Father who is in the heavens.
17 Think not that I came to destroy the law or the prophets: I came
not to destroy, but to fulfill. 18 For Amēn I say unto you, Till :heaven
and :earth pass away, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass away from
the law, till all things come to pass. 19 Whoso therefore shall break one of
these the least :commandments, and shall teach :men so, shall be called
least in the kingdom of the heavens; but whoso shall do and teach them, the
same shall be called great in the kingdom of the heavens. 20 For I say unto
you, that except your :righteousness exceed that of the scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter the kingdom of the heavens. 21 Ye
have heard that it was said to them of eld, Thou shalt not kill; and whoso
shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment: 22 but I say unto you, that every
one :angry with his :brother shall be in danger of the judgment; and whoso
shall say to his :brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the Sanhedrin; and
whoso shall say, Fool, shall be in danger unto the geenna of :fire. 23 If
therefore thou offer thy :gift upon the altar, and there remember that
thy :brother hath aught against thee, 24 leave there thy :gift before the altar,
and go first be reconciled to thy :brother, and then come and offer thy :gift.
25 Agree with thine :adversary quickly, while thou art with him in the way;
lest haply the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge to the
officer, and thou be cast into prison. 26 Amen, I say unto thee, Thou shalt in
no wise come out thence, till thou have paid the last farthing. 27 Ye
have heard that it was said, Thou shalt not commit adultery: 28 But I say
unto you, that every one that looketh on a woman to lust after her hath
already committed adultery with her is his :heart. 29 And if thy :right :eye
stumbleth thee, pluck it out, and cast from thee: for it is profitable for thee
that one of thy :members perish, and not thy whole :body be cast into
geenna. 30 And if thy right :hand stumbleth thee, cut it off, and cast from
thee: for it is profitable for thee that one of thy :members perish, and not thy
whole :body go into geenna. 31 It was said also, Whoso shall put away
his :wife, let him give her a bill of divorce: 32 But I say unto you, that every
one that putteth away his :wife, save for the cause of fornication, maketh her
an adulteress: and whoso shall marry one put away committeth adultery.
33 Again, ye have heard that it was said to them of eld, Thou shalt not
forswear, but shalt perform to the Lord thine :oaths: 34 but I say unto you,
Swear not at all; neither by the heaven, for it is :God’s throne; 35 nor by the
earth, for it is the footstool of his :feet; nor toward Jerusalem, for it is the
great King’s city. 36 Neither shalt thou swear by thy :head, for thou canst
not make one hair white or black. 37 But let your :word be, Yea, yea; Nay,
nay: and whatsoever is more than these is of the evil one. 38 Ye have
heard that is was said, Eye for eye, and tooth for tooth: 39 but I say unto you,
Resist not him that is evil: but whoever smiteth thee on thy right :cheek, turn
to him the other also. 40 And to him that would go to law with thee, and take
thy :coat, leave thy :cloak also. 41 And whosoever shall compel thee for one
mile, go with him two. 42 To him that asketh thee give, and from him that
would borrow of thee turn not away. 43 Ye have heard that it was said,
Thou shalt love thy :neighbor, and hate thine :enemy: 44 but I say unto you,
Love your :enemies, and pray for them that persecute you; 45 that ye may
become sons of your :Father who is in the heavens; because he maketh
his :sun to rise on the evil and good, and sendeth rain on just and unjust.
46 For if ye love them that love you, what reward have ye? do not even the
publicans the same? 47 And if ye greet your :brethren only, what do ye
more than others? do not even the Gentiles the same? 48 YE therefore shall
be perfect, as your :heavenly :Father is perfect.

Chapter 6
1 But take heed ye do not your :righteousness before :men, to be
seen of them: else ye have no reward with your :Father who is in the
heavens. 2 When therefore thou doest alms, sound not a trumpet
before thee, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that
they may have glory of :men. Amen I say unto you, They have their
full :reward. 3 But when THOU doest alms, let not thy :left hand know what
thy :right doeth: 4 that thine :alms be in :secret: and thy :Father who seeth
in :secret shall recompense thee. 5 And when ye pray, ye shall not be
as the hypocrites: for they love to stand and pray in the synagogues and in
the corners of the streets, that they be seen of :men. Amen I say unto you,
They have their full :reward. 6 But when THOU prayest, enter into thine
inner :chamber, and having shut thy :door, pray to thy :Father who is
in :secret, and thy :Father who seeth in :secret shall recompense thee.
7 But in praying use not vain repetitions, as the Gentiles: for they think that
they shall be surely heard for their much :speaking. 8 Be not therefore like
unto them: for :God your :Father knoweth what things ye have need of,
before ye :ask him. 9 Pray YE therefore thus:
Our Father who art in the heavens,
Hallowed be thy :name.
10 Thy :kingdom come.
Thy :will be done,
As in heaven, so on earth.
11 Our :daily :bread
Give us this day.
12 And forgive us our :debts,
As we also have forgiven our :debtors.
13 And bring us not into temptation,
But deliver us from the evil one.
14 For if ye forgive :men their :trespasses, your :heavenly :Father will also
forgive you. 15 But if ye forgive not :men their :trespasses, neither will
your :Father forgive your :trespasses. 16 And when ye fast, become not
as the hypocrites sad faced: for they disfigure their :faces, that they be seen
of :men to fast. Amen I say unto you, They have their full reward. 17 But
when THOU fastest, anoint thy :head, and wash thy :face; 18 that thou be not
seen of :men to fast, but of thy :Father who is in :secret: and thy :Father,
who seeth in :secret, shall recompense thee.
19 Treasure not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth
consumes and rust, and where thieves dig through and steal. 20 But
treasure up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust
consumes, and where thieves do not dig through nor steal: 21 for where
thy :treasure is, there will thy :heart be also. 22 The lamp of the body is the
eye: if therefore thine :eye be single, thy whole :body shall be of light. 23 But
if thine :eye be evil, thy whole :body shall be of darkness. If therefore the
light :in thee is darkness, how great the darkness! 24 No one can serve two
lords: for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or he will hold to the
one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon.
25 Therefore I say unto you, Be not anxious for your :soul, what ye shall eat,
or what ye shall drink; not yet for your :body, what ye shall put on. Is not the
soul more than the food, and the body than the raiment? 26 Behold the
birds of the heaven, that they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into
barns; and your :heavenly :Father feedeth them. Are not ye of much more
value than they? 27 And which of you by being anxious can add one cubit
unto his :age? 28 And why are ye anxious concerning raiment? Learn from
the lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin: 29 yet
I say unto you, that even Solomon in all his :glory was not arrayed like one
of these. 30 But if :God doth so clothe the grass of the field, which today is,
and tomorrow is cast into the oven, shall he not much more clothe you, O ye
of little faith? 31 Be not therefore anxious, saying, What shall we eat? or,
What shall we drink? or, Wherewith shall we be clothed? 32 For after all
these do the nations seek; for your :heavenly :Father knoweth that ye need
all these. 33 But seek ye first his :kingdom, and :righteousness; and all
these things shall be added to you. 34 Be not therefore anxious for the
morrow: for the morrow will be anxious for itself. Sufficient to the day is the
evil thereof.

Chapter 7
1 Judge not, that ye be not judged. 2 For with what judgment ye
judge, ye shall be judged: and with what measure ye measure, it shall be
measured to you. 3 And why beholdest thou the mote that is in the eye of
thy :brother; but considerest not the beam that is in thine :eye? 4 Or how
wilt thou say to thy :brother, Let me cast out the mote out of thine :eye; and
lo, the beam is in thine :eye? 5 Hypocrite, cast out first the beam out of
thine :eye; and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of the eye
of thy :brother. 6 Give not what is :holy to the dogs, neither cast your :pearls
before the swine, lest haply they shall trample them under their feet, and
should turn and rend you. 7 Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye
shall find; knock, and it shall be opened to you: 8 for every one that asketh
receiveth; and who seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it is being
opened. 9 Or what man of you, who, if his :son shall ask him for a loaf, will
give him a stone; 10 or also if he shall ask for a fish, will give him a serpent?
11 If ye therefore, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your :children,
how much more shall your :Father who is in the heavens give good things to
them that ask him? 12 All things therefore whatsoever ye would that :men
should do to you, thus do ye also to them: for this is the law and the
prophets.
13 Enter ye by the narrow gate: for wide and spacious is the way that
leadeth unto the destruction, and many are they that enter thereby.
14 Because narrow the gate, and straitened the way that leadeth unto the
life, and few are they that find it. 15 Beware of the false prophets, who
come unto you in sheep’s clothing, but inwardly are ravening wolves. 16 By
their :fruits ye shall know them. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of
thistles? 17 Thus every good tree bringeth forth good fruits; but the corrupt
tree bringeth forth evil fruits. 18 A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruits,
neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruits. 19 Every tree that bringeth
not forth good fruit is cut down, and cast into fire. 20 Surely then by
their :fruits ye shall know them. 21 Not every one that saith to me, Lord,
Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of the heavens; but who doeth the will of
my :Father who is in the heavens. 22 Many will say to me in that :day, Lord,
Lord, did we not prophesy in thy :name, and in thy :name cast out demons,
and in thy :name do many mighty works? 23 And then will I profess to them
[that] I never knew you: depart from me, ye that work :lawlessness.
24 Every one therefore who heareth these my words, and doeth them,
shall be likened to a wise man, who built his :house upon the rock: 25 and
the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat
upon that :house; and it fell not: for it was founded upon the rock. 26 And
every one that heareth these my words, and doeth them not, shall be
likened to a foolish man, who built his :house upon the sand: 27 and the rain
descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and smote upon
that :house; and it fell: and great was its :fall.
28 And it came to pass, when :Jesus ended these :words, the crowds
were astonished at his :teaching: 29 for he was teaching them as having
authority, and not as their :scribes.

Chapter 8
1 And when he was come down from the mountain, great crowds
followed him. 2 And lo, a leper came to him and worshipped him, saying,
Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst cleanse me. 3 And he stretched forth his :hand,
and touched him, saying, I will; be cleansed. And straightway his :leprosy
was cleansed. 4 And :Jesus saith to him, See thou tell no one; but go, show
thyself to the priest, and offer the gift that Mōsēs commanded, for a witness
to them. 5 And when he was entered into Capernaum, a centurion
came to him, beseeching him 6 and saying, Lord, my :boy lieth in the house
a paralytic, grievously tormented. 7 He saith to him, I will come and heal
him. 8 And the centurion answered and said, Lord, I am not fit that thou
shouldest come under MY :roof: but only say the word, and my :boy shall be
healed. 9 For I also am a man set under authority, having under myself
soldiers: and I say to this one, Go, and he goeth; and to another, Come, and
he cometh; and to my :bondman, Do this, and he doeth it. 10 And
when :Jesus heard it, he marvelled, and said to them that followed, Amen I
say unto you, With no one in :Israel have I found so great faith. 11 And I say
unto you, that many shall come from east and west, and shall sit down with
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of the heavens: 12 but the
sons of the kingdom shall be cast out into the outer :darkness: THERE shall
be the weeping and the gnashing of the teeth. 13 And :Jesus said to the
centurion, Go; as thou hast believed, so be it to thee. And the boy was
healed in that :hour. 14 And when :Jesus was come into the house of
Peter, he saw his wife’s :mother lying sick and in a fever. 15 And he touched
her :hand, and the fever left her; and she arose, and ministered to him.
16 And when even was come, they brought to him many demoniacs: and he
cast out the spirits with a word, and healed all that were ill: 17 that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying, Himself took
our :infirmities, and bare the sicknesses.
18 And seeing a crowd about him :Jesus commanded to depart unto
the other side. 19 And one scribe came to him and said, Teacher, I will
follow thee whithersoever thou goest. 20 And :Jesus saith to him, The foxes
have holes, and the birds of the heaven have nests; but the Son of :man
hath not where to lay his :head. 21 And another of the disciples said to him,
Lord, suffer me first to go and bury my :father. 22 But :Jesus saith to him,
Follow me; and leave the dead to bury their own :dead. 23 And when he
was entered into a boat, his :disciples followed him. 24 And lo, a great
tempest arose in the sea, so that the boat was covered with the waves: but
he was asleep. 25 And they came to him, and awoke him, saying, Save,
Lord; we perish. 26 And he saith to them, Why are ye fearful, O ye of little
faith? Then he arose, and rebuked the winds and the sea; and there was a
great calm. 27 And the men marvelled, saying, What manner of man is this,
that even the winds and the sea obey him? 28 And when he was come
to the other side into the country of the Gadarenes, two demoniacs met him,
coming forth out of the tombs, exceeding fierce, so that no one could pass
by that :way. 29 And lo, they cried out, saying, What have we to do with thee,
Son of :God? art thou come hither to torment us before the season? 30 Now
far from them was a herd of many swine feeding. 31 And the demons
besought him, saying, If thou cast us out, send us into the herd of :swine.
32 And he said to them, Go. And they came out, and went into the swine:
and lo, the whole herd rushed down the steep into the sea, and they died in
the waters. 33 And they that fed them fled, and went away into the city, and
told everything, and what befell the demoniacs. 34 And lo, all the city came
out to meet :Jesus: and when they saw him, they besought him that he
would depart from their :borders.

Chapter 9
1 And he entered into a boat, and crossed over, and came into his
own :city. 2 And lo, they brought to him a paralytic, lying on a bed:
and :Jesus seeing their :faith said to the paralytic, Be of good cheer, child;
thy :sins are forgiven. 3 And lo, certain of the scribes said within themselves,
This man blasphemeth. 4 And :Jesus knowing their :thoughts said,
Wherefore think ye evil in your :hearts? 5 For which is easier, to say,
Thy :sins are forgiven; or to say, Arise, and walk? 6 But that ye may know
that the Son of :man hath authority on the earth to forgive sins (then saith he
to the paralytic), Arise, and take up thy :bed, and go to thy :house. 7 And he
arose, and went away to his :house. 8 But when the crowds saw it, they
were afraid, and glorified the God who had given such authority to :men.
9 And :Jesus passing by thence saw a man, called Matthew, sitting at
the toll: and he saith to him, Follow me. And he arose, and followed him.
10 And it came to pass, as he sat at meat in the house, [and] lo, many
publicans and sinners came and sat down with :Jesus and his :disciples.
11 And the Pharisees seeing it said to his :disciples, Why eateth
your :Teacher with :publicans and sinners? 12 But he heard it, and said,
The healthy have no need of a physician, but the sick. 13 But go and learn
what is, I desire mercy, and not sacrifice: for I came not to call the righteous,
but sinners. 14 Then come to him the disciples of John, saying, Why do
we and the Pharisees fast, but thy :disciples fast not? 15 And :Jesus said to
them, Can the sons of the bridechamber mourn, as long as the bridegroom
is with them? but days will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken away
from them, and then will they fast. 16 And no one putteth a piece of
undressed cloth upon an old garment; for its patch taketh from the garment,
and a worse rent is made. 17 Neither do men put new wine into old
wine-skins: else the skins burst, and the wine is spilled, and the skins perish:
but they put new wine into fresh wine-skins, and both are preserved.
18 While he spake these things to them, lo, one ruler came and
worshipped him, saying [that] My :daughter is even now deceased: but,
come and lay thy :hand upon her, and she shall live. 19 And :Jesus arose,
and followed, also his :disciples. 20 And lo, a woman, who had an issue of
blood twelve years, came behind him, and touched the border of
his :garment: 21 for she said within herself, If I but touch his :garment, I shall
be made whole. 22 But :Jesus turning and seeing her said, Be of good
cheer, daughter; thy :faith hath made thee whole. And the woman became
whole from that :hour. 23 And when :Jesus came into the ruler’s :house,
and saw the flute-players, and the crowd making a tumult, 24 he said, Give
place; for the damsel is not dead, but sleepeth. And they laughed him to
scorn. 25 But when the crowd was put forth, he went in, and took her by the
hand; and the damsel arose. 26 And the fame hereof went forth into all
that :land. 27 And as :Jesus passed by thence, two blind men followed,
crying out, and saying, Have mercy on us, David’s Son. 28 And when he
was come into the house, the blind came to him: and :Jesus saith to them,
Believe ye that I am able to do this? They say to him, Yea, Lord. 29 Then
touched he their :eyes, saying, According to your :faith be it to you. 30 And
their :eyes were opened. And :Jesus strictly charged them, saying, See that
no one know it. 31 But they went forth, and spread abroad his fame in all
that :land. 32 And as they came forth, lo, they brought to him a dumb
demoniac. 33 And when the demon was cast out, the dumb spake: and the
crowds marvelled, saying, It was never so seen in :Israel. 34 But the
Pharisees said, By the prince of the demons casteth he out the demons.
35 And :Jesus went about all the cities and the villages, teaching in
their :synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing
every sickness and every infirmity. 36 But seeing the crowds, he was
moved with pity for them, because they were distressed and scattered, as if
sheep having no shepherd. 37 Then saith he to his :disciples, The harvest
indeed is plenteous, but the laborers are few. 38 Pray therefore the Lord of
the harvest, that he send forth laborers into his :harvest.

Chapter 10
1 And he called to him his twelve :disciples, and gave them authority over
unclean spirits, so as to cast them out, and to heal every sickness and every
infirmity. 2 Now the names of the twelve apostles are these: The first,
Simōn, :called Peter, and Andrew his :brother; and James the son
of :Zebedee, and John his :brother; 3 Philip, and Batholomew; Thōmas, and
Matthew the publican; James the son of :Alphæus, and Thaddæus; 4 Simon
the Cananæan, and Judas :Iscariōt, who also delivered him up.
5 These :twelve :Jesus sent forth, and charged them, saying,
Go not into the way of the nations, and enter not into a city of
Samaritans: 6 but go rather to the :lost :sheep of the house of Israel. 7 And
as ye go, preach, saying [that] The kingdom of the heavens is at hand.
8 Heal the sick, raise the dead, cleanse lepers, cast out demons: freely ye
received, freely give. 9 Get no gold, nor silver, nor brass in your :purses;
10 no wallet for your journey, neither two coats, nor shoes, nor staff: for the
laborer is worthy of his :food. 11 And into whatever city or village ye enter,
search out who in it is worthy; and there abide till ye go forth. 12 And as ye
enter into the house, greet it. 13 And if the house be worthy, let your :peace
come upon it: but if it be not worthy, let your :peace return to you. 14 And
whoso receive you not, nor hear your :words, as ye go forth out of the house
or that :city, shake off the dust of your :feet. 15 Amen I say unto you, It shall
be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah on judgment day
than for that city. 16 Lo, I send you forth as sheep amidst wolves:
become therefore wise as the serpents, and harmless as the doves. 17 But
beware of :men: for they will deliver you up to councils, and in
their :synagogues they will scourge you; 18 yea before governors and kings
shall ye be brought for my sake, for a witness to them and to the nations.
19 But when they deliver you up, be not anxious how or what ye shall speak:
for it shall be given you in that :hour what ye shall speak. 20 For it is not ye
that speak, but the Spirit of your :Father that speaketh in you. 21 And
brother shall deliver up brother unto death, and a father his child: and
children shall rise up against parents, and put them to death. 22 And ye
shall be hated of all for my :name’s sake: but who endureth to the end, the
same shall be saved. 23 But when they persecute you in this :city, flee into
the other: for Amen I say unto you, Ye shall in no wise go through the cities
of :Israel, till the Son of :man become. 24 A disciple is not above the teacher,
nor a bondman above his :lord. 25 Enough for the disciple that he become
as his :teacher, and the bondman as his :lord. If they have called the
house-master Beelzebul, how much rather them of his household! 26 Fear
not therefore them: for nothing is covered, that shall not be revealed, and
hid, that shall not be known. 27 What I tell you in the darkness, speak in the
light: and what ye hear in the ear, proclaim upon the housetops. 28 And fear
not them that kill the body, but cannot kill the soul: but rather fear him who
can destroy both soul and body in geenna. 29 Are not two sparrows sold for
a penny? and not one of them shall fall to the ground without your :Father:
30 but of you, the very hairs of the head are all numbered. 31 Fear not
therefore; ye are of more value than many sparrows. 32 Every one
therefore who shall confess in me before :men, in him will I also confess
before my :Father who is in the heavens. 33 But whosoever shall deny me
before :men, him will I also deny before my :Father who is in the heavens.
34 Think not that I came to bring peace on the earth: I came not to bring
peace, but a sword. 35 For I came to set a man at variance against
his :father, and a daughter against her :mother, and a bride against
her :mother in law: 36 and the man’s foes are they of his household.
37 Who loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me: and who
loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me. 38 And who
taketh not his :cross and followeth after me, is not worthy of me. 39 Who
findeth his :life shall lose it; and who loseth his :life for my sake shall find it.
40 Who receiveth you receiveth me, and who receiveth me receiveth him
that sent me. 41 Who receiveth a prophet unto a prophet’s name shall
receive a prophet’s reward; and who receiveth a righteous man unto a
righteous man’s name shall receive a righteous man’s reward. 42 And
whoso shall give to drink to one of these :little ones a cup of cold water only,
unto a disciple’s name, Amen I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose
his :reward.

Chapter 11
1 And it came to pass, when :Jesus had finished commanding his
twelve :disciples, he departed thence to teach and preach in their :cities.
2 Now when :John heard in the prison the works of the Christ, he sent
by his disciples, 3 and said to him, Art thou the coming one, or look we for
another? 4 And :Jesus answered and said to them, Go and report to John
what things ye hear and see: 5 the blind look up, and the lame walk, lepers
are cleansed, and the deaf hear, and the dead are raised and the poor are
given the Gospel. 6 And blessed is he, whoso shall not stumble in me.
7 And as these went away :Jesus began to say to the crowds concerning
John, What went ye out into the wilderness to behold? a reed shaken by the
wind? 8 But what went ye out to see? a man clothed in soft raiment? Lo,
they who wear soft raiment are in the houses of :kings. 9 But wherefore
went ye out? to see a prophet? Yea, I say unto you, even beyond a prophet.
10 This is he, of whom it is written,
Lo, I send my :messenger before thy face,
Who shall prepare thy :way before thee.
11 Amen I say unto you, Among them born of women no greater hath arisen
than John the Baptist: yet the lesser in the kingdom of the heavens is
greater than he. 12 And from the days of John the Baptist until now the
kingdom of the heavens suffereth violence, and men of violence take it by
force. 13 For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John. 14 And if
ye are willing to receive him, HE is the Elijah about to come. 15 Who hath
ears, let him hear. 16 But whereunto shall I liken this :generation? It is like
children sitting in the markets, who calling unto their fellows 17 say,
We piped to you, and ye did not dance;
We wailed, and ye did not mourn.
18 For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, He hath a
demon. 19 The Son of :man came eating and drinking, and they say, Lo,
gluttonous man, and winebibber, friend of publicans and sinners!
And :wisdom was justified by her :works. 20 Then began he to upbraid
the cities in which most of his powers were done, because they repented
not. 21 Woe to thee, Chorazein! woe to thee Bēthsaida! for if the
powers :done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidōn, they would have
repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. 22 Howbeit I say unto you, it
shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon on judgment day than for you.
23 And thou, Capernaum, shalt be exalted unto heaven? thou shalt go down
unto Hades: because if the powers :done in thee had been done in Sodom,
it would have remained until :today. 24 Howbeit I say unto you, that it shall
be more tolerable for Sodom land on judgment day, than for thee.
25 At that :season :Jesus answered and said, I thank thee, Father,
Lord of :heaven and :earth, that thou didst hide these things from the wise
and understanding, and didst reveal them unto babes: 26 yea, :Father, for
thus it was well-pleasing in thy sight. 27 All things have been delivered to
me by my :Father: and no one knoweth the Son, save the Father; neither
doth any know the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son
willeth to reveal him. 28 Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest. 29 Take my :yoke upon you, and learn of me;
for I am meek and lowly in :heart: and ye shall find rest to your :souls. 30 For
my :yoke is easy, and my :burden light.

Chapter 12
1 At that :season :Jesus went on the sabbaths through the grainfields;
and his :disciples hungered, and began to pluck ears and eat. 2 But the
Pharisees, seeing it, said to him, Lo, thy :disciples do what it is not lawful to
do on a sabbath. 3 But he said to them, Have ye not read what David did,
when he hungered, and they with him; 4 how he entered into the house
of :God, and they ate the :show-loaves, which it was not lawful for him to eat,
neither for those with him, but for the priests alone? 5 Or have ye not read in
the law, that on the sabbaths the priests in the temple profane the sabbath,
and are guiltless? 6 But I say unto you, that aught greater than the temple is
here. 7 But had ye known what is, I desire mercy, and not sacrifice, ye
would not have condemned the guiltless. 8 For the Son of :man is lord of
the sabbath. 9 And he departed thence, and went into their :synagogue:
10 and lo, a man having a hand withered. And they asked him, saying, If it is
lawful to heal on the sabbaths? that they might accuse him. 11 And he said
to them, What man shall there be of you, that shall have one sheep, and if
this fall into a pit on the sabbath, will he not lay hold on it, and lift it out?
12 How much then is a man of more value than a sheep! So that it is lawful
to do good on the Sabbath. 13 Then saith he to the man, Stretch forth
thy :hand. And he stretched forth; and it was restored whole, as the other.
14 But the Pharisees went out, and took counsel against him, how they
might destroy him. 15 And :Jesus perceiving it withdrew thence: and
many followed him; and he healed all, 16 and charged them that they make
him not known: 17 that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through Isaiah
the prophet, saying,
18 Lo, my :servant whom I have chosen;
My :beloved toward whom my :soul is well pleased:
I will put my :Spirit upon him,
And he shall declare judgment to the nations,
19 He shall not strive, nor cry aloud;
Neither shall any one hear his :voice in the streets.
20 A bruised reed shall he not break,
And smoking flax shall he not quench,
Till he send forth the judgment unto victory.
21 And in his :name shall nations hope.
22 Then they brought to him a demoniac, blind and dumb: and he
healed him, insomuch that the dumb spake and saw. 23 And all the crowds
were amazed, and said, Is this the son of David? 24 But when the
Pharisees heard it, they said, This man doth not cast out :demons but
by :Beelzebul, prince of the demons. 25 And knowing their :thoughts he
said to them, Every kingdom divided against itself is made desolate; and
every city or house divided against itself shall not stand: 26 and if :Satan
casteth out :Satan, he is divided against himself; how then shall
his :kingdom stand? 27 And if I by Beelzebul cast out the demons,
your :sons, by whom do they cast out? therefore shall THEY be your judges.
28 But if I by God’s Spirit cast out the demons, then is the kingdom of :God
come upon you. 29 Or how can one enter into the house of the strong, and
spoil his :goods, except he first bind the strong? and then he will despoil
his :house. 30 Who is not with me is against me; and who gathereth not with
me scattereth. 31 Therefore I say unto you, Every sin and blasphemy shall
be forgiven unto :men; but the blasphemy against the Spirit shall not be
forgiven. 32 And whoso shall speak a word against the Son of :man, it shall
be forgiven him; but whoso shall speak against the Holy :Spirit, it shall not
be forgiven him, neither in this :age, nor in the one to come. 33 Either
make the tree good, and its :fruit good; or make the tree corrupt, and its :fruit
corrupt: for the tree is known by the fruit. 34 Offspring of vipers, how can ye,
being evil, speak good things? for out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaketh. 35 The good man out of the good treasure bringeth forth
good things: and the evil man out of the evil treasure bringeth forth evil
things. 36 And I say unto you, that every idle word that :men shall speak,
they shall give account thereof on judgment day. 37 For by thy :words thou
shalt be justified, and by thy :words thou shalt be condemned.
38 Then certain of the scribes and Pharisees answered him, saying,
Teacher, we would see a sign from thee. 39 But he answered and said to
them, An evil and adulterous generation seeketh a sign; and no sign shall
be given it but the sign of Jonah the prophet: 40 for as Jonah was three days
and three nights in the belly of the whale; so shall the Son of :man be three
days and three nights in the heart of the earth. 41 The Ninevites shall stand
up in the judgment with this :generation, and shall condemn it: for they
repented at the preaching of Jonah; and lo, more than Jonah is here.
42 The queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with this :generation,
and shall condemn it: for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the
wisdom of Solomon; and lo, more than Solomon is here. 43 But when
the unclean spirit is gone out of the man, he passeth through waterless
places, seeking rest, and findeth it not. 44 Then he saith, I will return into
my :house whence I came out; and he cometh and findeth it empty and
swept and garnished. 45 Then goeth he, and taketh with himself seven
other spirits more evil than himself, and they enter in and dwell there: and
the last state of that :man becometh worse than the first. So shall it be also
to this :evil :generation.
46 While he was yet speaking to the crowds, lo, his :mother and
his :brethren stood without, seeking to speak to him. 47 And one said to him,
Lo, thy :mother and thy :brethren stand without, seeking to speak to thee.
48 But he answered and said to him that told him, Who is my :mother? and
who are my :brethren? 49 And he stretched forth his :hand over his
disciples, and said, Lo, my :mother and my :brethren! 50 For whoever shall
do the will of my :Father who is in the heavens, HE is my brother, and sister,
and mother.

Chapter 13
1 On that :day went :Jesus out of the house, and sat by the sea.
2 And great crowds were gathered unto him so that he entered into a boat,
and sat; and the whole crowd stood on the beach. 3 And he spake to them
many things in parables, saying, Lo, the sower went forth to sow; 4 and as
he sowed, some seeds fell by the way side, and the birds came and
devoured them: 5 and others fell upon the rocky places, where they had not
much earth: and straightway they sprang up, because they had no depth of
earth: 6 and when the sun was risen, they were scorched; and because they
had no root, withered away. 7 And others fell upon the thorns; and the
thorns came up, and choked them: 8 and others fell upon the good :ground,
and yielded fruit, the one a hundredfold, the one sixty, the one thirty. 9 Who
hath ears, let him hear.
10 And the disciples came, and said to him, Why speakest thou to
them in parables? 11 And he answered and said, [that] To you it is given to
know the mysteries of the kingdom of the heavens, but to them it is not
given. 12 For whoever hath, to him shall be given, and he shall have
abundance: but whoever hath not, from him shall be taken away even what
he hath. 13 Therefore speak I to them in parables; because seeing they see
not, and hearing they hear not, neither do they understand. 14 And to them
is fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah, which saith,
By hearing ye shall hear, and in no wise understand;
And seeing ye shall see, and in no wise perceive:
15 For the heart of this :people is waxed gross,
And their :ears are dull of hearing,
And their :eyes they have closed;
Lest haply they should perceive with their eyes,
And hear with their ears,
And understand with their heart, and should turn again,
And I shall heal them.
16 But blessed YOUR :eyes, for they see; and YOUR :ears, for they hear.
17 For Amen I say unto you, that many prophets and righteous men desired
to see what things ye see, and saw not; and to hear what things ye hear,
and heard not. 18 Hear YE therefore the parable of the sower. 19 When
any one heareth the word of the kingdom, and understandeth not, the evil
one cometh and snatcheth away what hath been sown in his :heart. This is
he sown by the way side. 20 And he sown upon the rocky places, this is who
heareth the word, and straightway with joy receiveth it; 21 yet hath no root in
himself, but dureth for a while; and when tribulation or persecution ariseth
because of the word, straightway he stumbleth. 22 And he sown among the
thorns, this is who heareth the word; and the care of the age, and the
deceitfulness of :riches, chokes the word, and he becometh unfruitful.
23 And he sown upon the good ground, this is who heareth the word, and
understandeth it; who verily beareth fruit and bringeth forth, the one a
hundredfold, the one sixty, the one thirty.
24 Another parable set he before them, saying, The kingdom of the
heavens is likened to a man that sowed good seed in his :field: 25 but
while :men slept, his :enemy came and sowed tares also among the grain,
and went away. 26 But when the blade sprang up, and brought forth fruit,
then appeared the tares also. 27 And the bondmen of the householder
came and said to him, Lord, didst thou not sow good seed in thy :field?
whence then hath it tares? 28 And he said to them, A hostile man did this.
And they say to him, Wilt thou then that we go away, and gather them up?
29 But he saith, Nay; lest haply in gathering up the tares, ye root up the grain
with them. 30 Let both grow together till the reaping: and in the season of
the reaping I will say to the reapers, First gather up the tares, and bind them
into bundles to :burn them: but gather the grain into my :barn.
31 Another parable set he before them, saying, The kingdom of the heavens
is like to a grain of mustard seed, which a man took, and sowed in his :field:
32 which indeed is a lesser among all the seeds; but when it is grown is
greater than the herbs, and becometh a tree, so that the birds of the heaven
come and lodge in the branches thereof. 33 Another parable spake he
to them; The kingdom of the heavens is like unto leaven, which a woman
took, and hid in three measures of meal, till all was leavened. 34 All
these spake :Jesus in parables to the crowds; and without parable spake he
nothing to them: 35 so that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through the
prophet, saying,
I will open my :mouth in parables;
I will utter things hidden from the foundation.
36 Then he left the crowds, and went into the house: and
his :disciples came to him, saying, Explain to us the parable of the tares of
the field. 37 And he answered and said, Who soweth the good seed is the
Son of :man; 38 and the field is the world; and the good seed, these are the
sons of the kingdom; and the tares are the sons of the evil one; 39 and the
enemy that sowed them is the devil: and the reaping is the consummation of
the age; and the reapers are angels. 40 Just as the tares are gathered up
and burned with fire; thus shall it be in the consummation of the age. 41 The
Son of :man shall send forth his :angels, and they shall gather out of
his :kingdom all the stumbling blocks and them that do :iniquity, 42 and shall
cast them into the furnace of the fire: there shall be the weeping and the
gnashing of the teeth. 43 Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in
the kingdom of their :Father. Who hath ears, let him hear. 44 The
kingdom of the heavens is like treasure hid in the field; which a man found,
and hid; and in his :joy goeth and selleth whatever he hath, and buyeth
that :field. 45 Again the kingdom of the heavens is like a merchant
seeking goodly pearls. 46 And having found one pearl of great price, went
and sold all he had, and bought it. 47 Again, the kingdom of the
heavens is like a net, cast into the sea, and gathering of every kind: 48 which,
when it was filled, they drew up on the beach; and sat down, and gathered
the good into vessels, but cast away the bad. 49 Thus shall it be in the
consummation of the age: the angels shall come forth, and sever the wicked
from among the righteous, 50 and shall cast them into the furnace of :fire:
there shall be the weeping and the gnashing of the teeth. 51 Have ye
understood all these? They say to him, Yea. 52 And he said to them,
Therefore every scribe discipled to the kingdom of the heavens is like a man
a householder, who bringeth forth out of his :treasure things new and old.
53 And it came to pass, when :Jesus had finished these parables, he
departed thence. 54 And coming into his :country he taught them in
their :synagogue, so that they were astonished, and said, Whence hath this
man this :wisdom, and the powers? 55 Is not this the son of the carpenter?
is not his :mother called Mariam? and his :brethren, James and Joseph, and
Simon, and Judah? 56 And his :sisters, are they not all with us? Whence
then hath this man all these things? 57 And they stumbled in him.
But :Jesus said to them, A prophet is not without honor, save in his :country,
and in his :house. 58 And he did not many mighty works there because of
their :unbelief.

Chapter 14
1 At that :season Herod the tetrarch heard the report about Jesus,
2 and said to his :servants, This is John the Baptist; HE is risen from the
dead; and therefore the powers work in him. 3 For :Herod had laid hold
on :John, and bound him, and put him in prison for the sake of Herodias, the
wife of Philip his :brother. 4 For :John was saying to him, It is not lawful for
thee to have her. 5 And he would have slain him, but feared the crowd,
because they deemed him a prophet. 6 But when :Herod’s birthday came,
the daughter of :Herodias danced in the midst, and pleased :Herod.
7 Whereupon he promised with an oath to give her whatever she should ask.
8 And she, put forward by her :mother, saith, Give me here on a platter the
head of John the Baptist. 9 And the king, grieved for the sake of the oaths,
and of them that sat at meat with him, commanded it to be given; 10 and he
sent and beheaded John in the prison. 11 And his :head was brought on a
platter, and given to the damsel: and she brought it to her :mother. 12 And
his :disciples came, and took up the corpse, and buried him and went and
told :Jesus. 13 Now when :Jesus heard it, he withdrew thence in a boat,
to a desert place apart: and the crowds heard it, and followed him on foot
from the cities. 14 And he came forth, and saw a great crowd, and he had
compassion on them, and healed their :sick. 15 And when even was come,
the disciples came to him, saying, The place is desert, and the hour is
already past; send the crowds away, that they may go into the villages, and
buy themselves food. 16 But :Jesus said to them, They have no need to go
away; give YE them to eat. 17 And they say to him, We have here but five
loaves, and two fishes. 18 And he said, Bring them hither to me. 19 And he
commanded the crowds to sit down on the grass, took the five loaves and
the two fishes, and looked up to :heaven, blessed and brake, and gave the
loaves to the disciples, and the disciples to the crowds. 20 And all ate, and
were filled: and they took up what remained over of the broken pieces,
twelve baskets full. 21 And they that ate were about five thousand men,
besides women and children. 22 And straightway he constrained the
disciples to enter into a boat, and to go before him unto the other side, till he
should send the crowds away. 23 And having sent the crowds away, he
went up into the mountain apart to pray: and when even was come, he was
there alone. 24 But the boat was now many furlongs distant from the land,
distressed by the waves; for the wind was contrary. 25 And in the fourth
watch of the night he came unto them, walking upon the sea. 26 And the
disciples seeing him walking on the sea were troubled, saying [that] It is a
ghost; and cried out for :fear. 27 But straightway :Jesus spake to them,
saying, Be of good cheer; it is I; be not afraid. 28 And :Peter answered and
said to him, Lord, if it be thou, bid me come unto thee upon the waters.
29 And he said Come. And Peter went down from the boat, and walked
upon the waters and was coming to :Jesus. 30 But seeing the wind, he was
afraid; and as he began to sink, he cried out, saying, Lord, save me. 31 And
straightway :Jesus stretched forth his :hand, and took hold of him, and saith
to him, Thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt? 32 And when they
were gone up into the boat, the wind ceased. 33 And those in the boat
worshipped him, saying, Truly thou art God’s Son. 34 And they crossed
over and came to the land, unto Gennesaret. 35 And when the men of
that :place knew him, they sent into all that :region round about, and brought
to him all the ailing, 36 and besought him that they might only touch the
border of his :garment: and as many as touched were made whole.

Chapter 15
1 Then come to :Jesus from Jerusalem Pharisees and scribes,
saying, 2 Why do thy :disciples transgress the tradition of the elders? for
they wash not their hands when they eat bread. 3 But he answered and
said to them, Why do YE also transgress the commandment of :God
because of your :tradition? 4 For :God said, Honor thy :father and :mother:
and, Who revileth father or mother, let him die. 5 But YE say, Whoever shall
say to his :father or :mother, That wherewith thou mightest have profited by
me is a gift to God, 6 shall in no wise honor his :father. And ye made void
the law of :God because of your :tradition. 7 Ye hypocrites, well did Isaiah
prophesy of you, saying,
8 This :people honoreth me with their lips;
But their :heart is far from me.
9 But in vain worship they me,
Teaching for doctrines precepts of men.
10 And he called to him the crowd, and said to them, Hear, and understand:
11 Not what cometh into the mouth defileth the man; but what goeth out of
the mouth, this defileth the man. 12 Then come the disciples, and say
to him, Knowest thou that the Pharisees were stumbled, when they heard
the saying? 13 But he answered and said, Every planting which
my :heavenly :Father planted not, shall be rooted up. 14 Leave them, they
are blind guides. And if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into a pit.
15 And :Peter answered and said to him, Declare to us the parable. 16 And
he said, Are ye also even yet without understanding? 17 Perceive ye not,
that all that goeth into the mouth passeth into the belly, and is cast out into
the draught? 18 But the things which go out of the mouth come forth out of
the heart; and those defile the man. 19 For out of the heart come forth evil
thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witnessings,
blasphemies: 20 these are what defile the man; but to eat with unwashen
hands defileth not the man.
21 And :Jesus went out thence, and withdrew into the parts of Tyre
and Sidon. 22 And, lo, a Canaanite woman came out from those :borders,
and cried, saying, Have mercy on me, Lord, son of David; my :daughter is
grievously vexed with a demon. 23 But he answered her not a word. And
his :disciples came and asked him, saying, Send her away; for she crieth
after us. 24 But he answered and said, I was not sent but unto the
lost :sheep of the house of Israel. 25 But she came and worshipped him,
saying, Lord, help me. 26 And he answered and said, It is not good to take
the bread of the children and cast it to the dogs. 27 But she said, Yea, Lord:
for even the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from the table of
their :masters. 28 Then :Jesus answered and said to her, O woman, great is
thy :faith: be it done unto thee as thou wilt. And her :daughter was healed
from that :hour.
29 And :Jesus departed thence, and came nigh to the sea of :Galilee;
and went up into the mountain, and sat there. 30 And great crowds came to
him, having with them the maimed, lame, blind, dumb and many others, and
they cast them down at his :feet; and he healed them: 31 so that the crowd
wondered, seeing the dumb speaking, and the lame walking, and the blind
seeing: and they glorified the God of Israel. 32 And :Jesus called unto
him his :disciples, and said, I have compassion on the crowd, because they
continue with me already three days and have nothing to eat: and I would
not send them away fasting, lest haply they faint on the way. 33 And the
disciples say to him, Whence should we have so many loaves in a desert as
to fill so great a crowd? 34 And :Jesus saith to them, How many loaves have
ye? And they said, Seven, and a few small fishes. 35 And he commanded
the crowd to sit on the ground; 36 and took the seven loaves and the fishes;
and gave thanks and brake, and gave to the disciples, and the disciples to
the crowds. 37 And all ate, and were filled: and they took up what remained
over of the broken pieces, seven hampers full. 38 And who ate were four
thousand men, besides women and children. 39 And he sent away the
crowds, and entered into the boat, and came into the borders of Magadan.

Chapter 16
1 And the Pharisees and Sadducees came, and trying him asked him
to show them a sign from :heaven. 2 But he answered and said to them,
When it is evening, ye say, Fair weather: for the heaven is red. 3 And in the
morning, Foul weather today: for the heaven is red and lowering. Ye know
how to discern the face of the heaven; but ye cannot discern the signs of the
seasons. 4 An evil and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign; and no
sign shall be given it, but the sign of Jonah. And he left them, and departed.
5 And the disciples came to the other side and forgot to take loaves.
6 And :Jesus said to them, Take heed and beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees and Sadducees. 7 And they reasoned among themselves,
saying [that], We took no loaves. 8 And :Jesus perceiving it said, Ye of little
faith, why reason ye among yourselves, because ye have no loaves? 9 Do
ye not yet perceive, neither remember the five loaves of the five thousand,
and how many baskets ye took up? 10 Neither the seven loaves of the four
thousand, and how many hampers ye took up? 11 How perceive ye not that
I spake not to you concerning loaves? But beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees and Sadducees. 12 Then understood they that he bade them
beware not of the leaven of the loaves, but of the teaching of the Pharisees
and Sadducees.
13 Now when :Jesus came into the parts of Cæsarea :Philippi, he
asked his :disciples, saying, Who do :men say that the Son of :man is?
14 And they said, Some say John the Baptist; and some, Elijah; and others,
Jeremiah, or one of the prophets. 15 He saith to them, But who say YE that
I am? 16 And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art the Christ, the Son
of the living :God. 17 And :Jesus answered and said to him, Blessed art
thou, Simon Bar-Jonah: for flesh and blood hath not revealed it to thee, but
my :Father who is in the heavens. 18 And I also say unto thee, that thou art
Peter, and upon this :rock I will build my :church and the gates of Hades
shall not prevail against it. 19 I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of the
heavens; and whatever thou shalt bind on the earth shall be bound in the
heavens; and whatever thou shalt loose on the earth shall be loosed in the
heavens. 20 Then charged he the disciples that they should tell no one that
he is the Christ.
21 From then on began Jesus Christ to show his :disciples, that he
must go to Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the elders and chief priests
and scribes, and be killed, and the third day be raised. 22 And :Peter took
him, and began to rebuke him, saying Mercy on thee, Lord: this shall in
nowise be to thee. 23 But he turned, and said to :Peter, Get behind me,
Satan: thou art a stumbling unto me: for thou mindest not the things of :God,
but the things of :men. 24 Then said :Jesus to his disciples, If any would
come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his :cross, and follow me.
25 For whoso would save his :life shall lose it: and whoso shall lose his :life
for my sake shall find it. 26 For what shall a man be profited, if he shall gain
the whole world, and forfeit his :life? or what shall a man give in exchange
for his :life? 27 For the Son of :man is about to come in the glory of
his :Father with his :angels; and then shall he render unto each according to
his doing. 28 Amen I say unto you [that], There are some of those standing
here, who shall in nowise taste of death, till they see the Son of :man
coming in his :kingdom.

Chapter 17
1 And after six days :Jesus taketh with him :Peter, and James, and
John his :brother, and bringeth them up into a high mountain apart: 2 and he
was transfigured before them; and his :face did shine as the sun, and
his :garments became white as the light. 3 And lo, Moses and Elijah
appeared to them, talking with him. 4 And :Peter answered, and said
to :Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here: if thou wilt, I will make here three
tents; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah. 5 While he was
yet speaking, lo, a bright cloud overshadowed them: and lo, a voice out of
the cloud, saying, This is my :Son the beloved in whom I am well pleased;
hear him. 6 And when the disciples heard it, they fell on their face, and were
sore afraid. 7 And :Jesus came and touched them and said, Arise, and be
not afraid. 8 And lifting up their :eyes, they saw no one, save only Jesus
himself. 9 And as they were coming down from the mountain, :Jesus
commanded them, saying, Tell the vision to no one, until the Son of :man be
raised from the dead. 10 And the disciples asked him, saying, Why then say
the scribes that Elijah must first come? 11 And he answered and said, Elijah
indeed cometh, and shall restore all things: 12 but I say unto you, that an
Elijah is come already, and they knew him not, but did unto him whatever
they would. Thus also is the Son of :man about to suffer of them. 13 Then
understood the disciples that he spake to them of John the Baptist.
14 And when they came to the crowd, a man came unto him, kneeling
to him, and saying, 15 Lord, have mercy on my :son: because he is epileptic,
and fareth badly; for oft he falleth into the fire, and oft into the water. 16 And
I brought him unto thy :disciples, and they could not cure him.
17 And :Jesus answered and said, O faithless generation and perverse, how
long shall I be with you? how long shall I bear with you? bring him here to
me. 18 And :Jesus rebuked him; and the demon went out of him: and the
boy was cured from that :hour. 19 Then came the disciples to :Jesus apart,
and said, Why could not we cast out? 20 And he saith to them, Because of
your :little faith: for Amen I say unto you, If ye have faith as a grain of
mustard seed, ye shall say to this :mountain, Remove hence to yonder; and
it shall remove; and nothing shall be impossible to you.
22 And while they were assembling in :Galilee, :Jesus said to them,
The Son of :man is about to be delivered up into men’s hands; 23 and they
shall kill him, and the third day he shall be raised up. And they were
exceeding sorry.
24 And when they came to Capernaum, they that received the
half-shekel came to :Peter, and said, Doth not your :teacher pay the
half-shekel? 25 He saith, Yea. And when he came into the house, :Jesus
anticipated him, saying, What thinkest thou, Simon? the kings of the earth,
from whom receive they toll or tribute? from their :sons, or from :strangers?
26 And when he said, From :strangers, :Jesus said to him, Surely then the
sons are free. 27 But, that we stumble them not, go to the sea, and cast a
hook, and take up the fish that first cometh up; and on opening his :mouth,
thou shalt find a shekel: that take, and give to them for me and thee.

Chapter 18
1 In that :hour came the disciples to :Jesus, saying, Who then is
greater in the kingdom of the heavens? 2 And he called to him a little child,
and set it in their midst, 3 and said, Amen I say unto you, Except ye turn, and
become as the little children, ye shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of
the heavens. 4 Whoever therefore shall humble himself as this little :child,
the same is the greater in the kingdom of the heavens. 5 And whoso shall
receive one such little child in my :name receiveth me: 6 but whoso shall
stumble one of these :little ones believing unto me, it is profitable for him
that a great millstone be hanged about his :neck, and he be sunk in the
depth of the sea. 7 Woe to the world because of the stumblings: for the
stumblings must needs come; but woe to the man through whom the
stumbling cometh! 8 And if thy :hand or thy :foot stumbleth thee cut it off
and cast from thee: it is good for thee to enter into the life maimed or lame,
rather than having two hands or two feet to be cast into the eternal :fire.
9 And if thine :eye stumbleth thee, pluck it out, and cast from thee: it is good
for thee to enter into the life one-eyed rather than having two eyes to be cast
into the geenna of :fire. 10 See ye despise not one of these :little ones:
for I say unto you, that their :angels in the heavens see at all times the face
of my :Father who is in the heavens. 12 How think ye? if any man come to
have a hundred sheep, and one of them go astray, will he not leave the
ninety-nine on the mountains, and go and seek that which goeth astray?
13 And if he come to find it, Amen I say unto you that he rejoiceth over it
more than over the ninety-nine which have not gone astray. 14 Thus it is not
a thing willed before my :Father who is in the heavens that one of
these :little ones perish. 15 And if thy :brother sin, go, reprove him
between thee and him alone: if he hear thee, thou hast gained thy :brother.
16 But if he hear not, take with thee one or two more, that at the mouth of
two witnesses or three every word stand. 17 And if he refuse to hear them,
tell the church: and if he refuse to hear the church also, let him be to thee as
the Gentile and the publican. 18 Amen I say unto you, What things
soever ye shall bind on :earth shall be bound in heaven; and what things
soever ye shall loose on :earth shall be loosed in heaven. 19 Again, Amen,
I say unto you, that if two of you shall agree on :earth as touching anything
they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my :Father who is in the heavens.
20 For where two or three are gathered unto my :name, there am I in their
midst.
21 Then came :Peter and said to him, Lord, how oft shall my :brother
sin against me, and I forgive him? until seven times? 22 :Jesus saith to him,
I say not unto thee, Until seven times; but, Until seventy times and seven.
23 Therefore is the kingdom of the heavens likened unto a man, a king, who
would make a reckoning with his :bondmen. 24 And when he had begun to
reckon, one was brought to him, debtor for ten thousand talents. 25 But
forasmuch as he had not wherewith to pay, the lord commanded him to be
sold, and his :wife, and :children, and all that he had, and payment to be
made. 26 The bondman therefore fell down and worshipped him, saying,
Have patience with me, and I will pay thee all. 27 And the lord of
that :bondman, moved with compassion, released him, and forgave him the
loan. 28 But that :bondman went out, and found one of his :fellow-bondmen
who owed him a hundred shillings: and he laid hold on him, and took him by
the throat, saying, Pay if thou owest aught. 29 His :fellow-bondman
therefore fell down and besought him, saying, Have patience with me, and I
will pay thee. 30 And he would not: but went and cast him into prison, till he
should pay what was due. 31 His :fellow-bondmen therefore saw what was
done and were exceeding sorry, and came and told to their :lord all that was
done. 32 Then his :lord called him to him, and saith to him, Wicked servant,
I forgave thee all that :debt, since thou besoughtest me: 33 shouldest not
thou also have had mercy on thy :fellow-bondman, as I had mercy on thee?
34 And his :lord was wroth, and delivered him to the tormentors, till he
should pay all that was due. 35 Thus also shall my :heavenly :Father do to
you, if ye forgive not each his :brother from your :hearts.

Chapter 19
1 And it came to pass when :Jesus had finished these :words, he
departed from :Galilee and came into the borders of :Judæa beyond the
Jordan; 2 and great crowds followed him; and he cured them there.
3 And Pharisees came to him, trying him, and saying, Whether it is
lawful to put away one’s :wife for every cause? 4 And he answered and said,
Have ye not read, that he who created from the beginning made them male
and female, 5 and said, For this cause shall a man leave :father and :mother,
and shall cleave to his :wife; and the two shall become one flesh? 6 So that
they are no more two, but one flesh. What therefore :God hath yoked
together, let not man put asunder. 7 They say to him, Why then did Moses
command to give a bill of divorce, and to put away? 8 He saith to them [that],
Moses for your hardness of :heart suffered you to put away your :wives: but
from the beginning it hath not been thus. 9 And I say unto you [that]
Whosoever shall put away his :wife, except for fornication, and shall marry
another, committeth adultery. 10 The disciples say to him, If the case of the
man is thus with the woman, it is not expedient to marry. 11 But he said to
them, Not all receive the saying, but they to whom it is given. 12 For there
are eunuchs who were thus born from their mother’s womb: and there are
eunuchs who were made eunuchs by :men: and there are eunuchs who
made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of the heavens’ sake. Who is
able to receive, let him receive it.
13 Then were brought to him little children, that he should lay :hands
on them, and pray: and the disciples rebuked them. 14 But :Jesus said,
Suffer the little children, and forbid them not, to come unto me: for of such is
the kingdom of the heavens. 15 And he laid :hands on them, and departed
thence.
16 And lo, one came to him and said, Teacher, what good thing shall
I do, that I may have eternal life? 17 And he said to him, Why askest thou
me concerning what is the good? One is the :good: but if thou wouldest
enter into the life, keep the commandments. 18 He saith to him, Which?
And :Jesus said, :Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou
shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear false witness, 19 Honor thy :father
and :mother; and, Thou shalt love thy :neighbor as thyself. 20 The young
man saith to him, All these have I observed: what lack I yet? 21 :Jesus said
to him, If thou wouldst be perfect, go, sell what thou hast, and give to the
poor, and thou shalt have treasure in the heavens; and come hither, follow
me. 22 But when the young man heard this :saying, he went away sorrowful;
for he was one having great possessions. 23 And :Jesus said to
his :disciples, Amen I say unto you that a rich man shall hardly enter into the
kingdom of the heavens. 24 And again I say unto you, It is easier for a
camel to enter through a needle’s eye, than for a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of :God. 25 And when the disciples heard it, they were astonished
exceedingly, saying, Who then can be saved? 26 And :Jesus looked upon
them and said to them, With men this is impossible; but with :God all things
are possible. 27 Then answered :Peter and said to him, Lo, we have left
all, and followed thee; what then shall we have? 28 And :Jesus said to them,
Amen I say unto you, that ye who have followed me, in the regeneration
when the Son of :man shall sit on a throne of his glory, YE also shall sit upon
twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of :Israel. 29 And every one that
hath left houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or children, or
fields, for my :name’s sake, shall receive manifold, and shall inherit eternal
life. 30 But many first shall be last; and last first.

Chapter 20
1 For the kingdom of the heavens is like a man, a householder, who went
out with the dawn to hire laborers for his :vineyard. 2 And when he had
agreed with the laborers for a shilling a :day, he sent them into his :vineyard.
3 And he went out about the third hour, and saw others standing in the
market idle; 4 and to those he said, Go YE also into the vineyard, and
whatsoever is right I will give you. And they went away. 5 And again he
went out about the sixth and ninth hour, and did likewise. 6 And about the
eleventh he went out, and found others standing; and saith to them, Why
stand ye here all the day idle? 7 They say to him, Because no one hath
hired us. He saith to them, Go YE also into the vineyard. 8 And when even
was come, the lord of the vineyard saith to his :steward, Call the laborers,
and pay their hire, beginning from the last unto the first. 9 And when those
hired about the eleventh hour came, they received each a shilling. 10 And
when the first came, they supposed that they would receive more; and THEY
also received each a shilling. 11 And when they received it, they murmured
against the householder, 12 saying, These :last have wrought one hour, and
thou hast made them equal to us, who have borne the burden of the day
and the scorching heat. 13 But he answered and said to one of them, Friend,
I do thee no wrong: didst not thou agree with me for a shilling? 14 Take up
what is thine, and go; but to this :last I will to give even as unto thee. 15 Is it
not meet for me to do what I will with :mine? or is thine :eye evil, because I
am good? 16 Thus the last shall be first, and the first last.
17 And as Jesus was about to go up to Jerusalem, he took the twelve
disciples apart, and on the way he said to them, 18 Lo, we go up to
Jerusalem; and the Son of :man shall be delivered to the chief priests and
scribes; and they shall condemn him to death, 19 and shall deliver him to the
nations to :mock, and scourge, and crucify: and the third day he shall rise
again.
20 Then came to him the mother of the sons of Zebedee with
her :sons, worshipping, and asking aught of him. 21 And he said to her,
What wouldest thou? She saith to him, Command that these my :two sons
may sit, one on thy right, and one on thy left, in thy :kingdom. 22 But :Jesus
answered and said, Ye know not what ye ask. Can ye drink the cup that I am
about to drink? They say to him, We can. 23 He saith to them, My :cup
indeed ye shall drink: but to sit on my right, and on my left, is not mine to
give but for whom it hath been prepared of my :Father. 24 And when the ten
heard it, they were indignant with the two brothers. 25 But :Jesus called
them to him, and said, Ye know that the rulers of the nations lord it over
them, and their great exercise authority over them. 26 Not thus is it among
you: but who would become great among you shall be your servant; 27 and
who would be first among you shall be your bondman: 28 even as the Son
of :man came not to be served, but to serve, and to give his :life a ransom
for many.
29 And as they were going out from Jericho, a great crowd followed
him. 30 And lo, two blind men sitting by the way side, when they heard that
Jesus was passing by, cried out, saying, Lord, have mercy on us, David’s
Son. 31 And the crowd rebuked them, that they should keep still: but they
cried out the more, saying, Lord, have mercy on us, David’s Son.
32 And :Jesus stopped and called them, and said, What will ye I should do to
you? 33 They say to him, Lord, that our :eyes be opened. 34 And :Jesus,
pitying them, touched their :eyes; and straightway they looked up, and
followed him.

Chapter 21
1 And when they drew nigh to Jerusalem, and came to Bethphage, to
the mount of :Olives, then Jesus sent two disciples, 2 saying to them, Go
into the village that is over against you, and straightway ye shall find an ass
tied, and a colt with her: loose them, and bring to me. 3 And if any one
speak aught to you, ye shall say [that], The Lord hath need of them; and
straightway he will send them. 4 Now this is come to pass, that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken through the prophet, saying,
5 Tell ye the daughter of Zion,
Lo, thy :King cometh to thee,
Gentle, and riding on an ass,
And on a colt, foal of an ass.
6 And the disciples went, and did even as :Jesus appointed them, 7 and
brought the ass, and the colt, and put on them their garments; and he sat on
them. 8 And the most part of the crowd spread their own :garments in the
way; and others were cutting branches from the trees and were spreading
them in the way. 9 And the crowds that went before him, and that followed,
cried, saying
Hōsanna to David’s Son:
Blessed he that cometh in the Lord’s name;
Hosanna in the highest.
10 And when he was come into Jerusalem, all the city was stirred, saying,
Who is this? 11 And the crowds said, This is the prophet, Jesus, the one
from Nazareth of :Galilee.
12 And Jesus entered into the temple, and cast out all that sold and
bought in the temple, and overthrew the tables of the money-changers, and
the seats of them that sold the doves; 13 and he saith to them, It is written,
My :house shall be called a house of prayer: but ye make it a den of robbers.
14 And the blind and lame came to him in the temple; and he cured them.
15 But the chief priests seeing the wonders which he did and the
children :crying in the temple and saying, Hosanna to the son of David, were
indignant, 16 and said to him, Hearest thou what these are saying?
And :Jesus saith to them, Yea: did ye never read [that] Out of the mouth of
babes and sucklings thou hast perfected praise? 17 And he left them,
and went forth out of the city to Bethany, and lodged there.
18 Now in the morning as he returned to the city, he hungered.
19 And seeing one fig tree on the way, he came to it, and found nothing
thereon, but leaves only; and he saith to it, Be there no more fruit from thee
unto the age. And immediately the fig tree withered away. 20 And the
disciples seeing it marvelled, saying, How did the fig tree immediately wither
away? 21 And :Jesus answered and said to them, Amen I say unto you, If
ye shall have faith, and doubt not, ye shall not only do what is done to the fig
tree, but even if ye shall say to this mountain, Be taken up and cast into the
sea, it shall be done. 22 And all things whatsoever ye shall ask in :prayer,
believing, ye shall receive.
23 And when he came into the temple, the chief priests came to him
while teaching, and the elders of the people, saying, By what authority doest
thou these things? and who gave thee this :authority? 24 And :Jesus
answered and said to them, I also will ask you one word, which if ye tell me,
I also will tell you by what authority I do these things. 25 The baptism
of :John, whence was it? from heaven or from men? And they reasoned
with themselves, saying, If we shall say, From heaven; he will say to us,
Why then did ye not believe him? 26 But if we shall say, From men; we fear
the crowd; for all hold :John as a prophet. 27 And they answered :Jesus,
and said, We know not. HE also said to them, Neither tell I you by what
authority I do these things. 28 But what think ye? A man had two children;
and he came to the first, and said, Child, go work today in the vineyard.
29 And he answered and said, I go, lord, and went not. 30 And he came to
the second, and said likewise. And he answered and said, I will not, and
went not; but afterward he repented, and went. 31 Which of the two did the
will of the father? They say, The last. :Jesus saith to them, Amen I say unto
you, that the publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom of :God before
you. 32 For John came unto you in the way of righteousness, and ye
believed him not; but the publicans and the harlots believed him: but ye
seeing it did not even repent afterward unto :believing him. 33 Hear
another parable: There was a man, a householder, who planted a vineyard,
and set a hedge about it, and digged a winepress in it, and built a tower, and
let it out to husbandmen, and went into another country. 34 And when the
season of the fruits drew near, he sent his :bondmen unto the husbandmen,
to receive its :fruits. 35 And the husbandmen took his :bondmen, and beat
one, and killed another, and stoned another. 36 Again, he sent
other :bondmen more than the first: and they did to them likewise. 37 But
afterward he sent unto them his :son, saying, They will reverence my :son.
38 But the husbandmen, seeing the son, said among themselves, This is the
heir; come on, let us kill him, and have his :inheritance. 39 And they took
and cast him forth out of the vineyard, and killed him. 40 When therefore the
lord of the vineyard shall come, what will he do to those :husbandmen?
41 They say to him, He will miserably destroy those miserable men, and will
let out the vineyard to other husbandmen, who shall render him the fruits in
their :seasons. 42 :Jesus saith to them, Did ye never read in the scriptures,
The stone which the builders rejected,
The same was made head of the corner;
This was from the Lord,
And it is marvellous in our eyes?
43 Therefore I say unto you [that], The kingdom of :God shall be taken away
from you, and shall be given to a nation bringing forth its :fruits. 44 And
who falleth on this :stone shall be broken to pieces: but on whomever it shall
fall, it will scatter him as dust. 45 And when the chief priests and the
Pharisees heard his :parables, they perceived that he spake of them.
46 And seeking to lay hold on him, they feared the crowds, because they
deemed him a prophet.

Chapter 22
1 And :Jesus answered and spake again in parables to them, saying,
2 The kingdom of the heavens is likened unto a man, a king, who made a
marriage feast for his :son, 3 and sent forth his bondmen to call those
bidden to the marriage feast: and they would not come. 4 Again he sent
forth other bondmen, saying, Tell them that are bidden, Lo, I have made
ready my :dinner; my :oxen and the fatlings are killed, and all things are
ready: come to the marriage feast. 5 But they made light thereof, and went
away, one to his own :farm, another to his :merchandise; 6 and the rest laid
hold on his :bondmen, and treated them shamefully, and killed them. 7 But
the king was wroth; and he sent his :armies, and destroyed
those :murderers, and burned their :city. 8 Then saith he to his :bondmen,
The wedding is ready, but those bidden were not worthy. 9 Go therefore
unto the partings of the highways, and as many as ye shall find, bid to the
marriage feast. 10 And those :bondmen went out into the highways, and
gathered all that they found, both bad and good: and the wedding was filled
with guests. 11 But when the king came in to behold the guests, he saw
there a man who had no wedding-garment: 12 and saith to him, Friend, how
camest thou in hither having no wedding-garment? And HE was speechless.
13 Then the king said to the ministers, Bind him hand and foot, and cast him
out into the outer :darkness; there shall be the weeping and the gnashing of
the teeth. 14 For many are called, but few chosen.
15 Then went the Pharisees, and took counsel how they might
ensnare him in talk. 16 And they send him their :disciples, with the
Herodians, saying, Teacher, we know that thou art true, and teachest the
way of :God in truth, and carest for no one: for thou regardest not men’s
persons. 17 Tell us therefore, What thinkest thou? Is it lawful to give tribute
to Cæsar, or not? 18 But :Jesus perceived their :wickedness, and said, Why
make ye trial of me, hypocrites? 19 Show me the tribute :money. And they
brought him a shilling. 20 And he saith to them, whose is this :image and
inscription? 21 They say, Cæsar’s. Then he saith to them, Render
therefore to Cæsar the things of Cæsar; and to :God the things of God.
22 And when they heard it, they marvelled, and left him, and went away.
23 On that :day Sadducees came to him saying that there is no
resurrection: and they questioned him, 24 saying, Teacher, Moses said, If
one die having no children, his :brother shall marry his :wife, and raise up
seed to his :brother. 25 Now seven brethren were with us: and the first
married and deceased, and having no seed left his :wife to his :brother;
26 likewise the second also, and the third, unto the seven. 27 And after them
all, the woman died. 28 In the resurrection therefore whose wife shall she
be of the seven? for all had her. 29 But :Jesus answered and said to them,
Ye err, not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of :God. 30 For in the
resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as angels
in :heaven. 31 But about the resurrection of the dead, have ye not read what
was spoken to you by :God, saying, 32 I am the God of Abraham, and the
God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? He is not the God of the dead, but of
the living. 33 And the crowds heard and were astonished at his :teaching.
34 But the Pharisees, when they heard that he had silenced the
Sadducees, gathered together. 35 And one of them, a lawyer, trying him
questioned: 36 Teacher, which is the great commandment in the law?
37 And he said to him, Thou shalt love the Lord thy :God with all thy heart,
and with all thy :soul, and with all thy mind. 38 This is the great and first
commandment. 39 And a second like it is this, Thou shalt love thy :neighbor
as thyself. 40 On these two commandments hangeth the whole law and the
prophets. 41 Now while the Pharisees were gathered together, :Jesus
questioned them, 42 saying, What think ye of the Christ? whose son is he?
They say to him, :David’s. 43 He saith to them, How then doth David in
Spirit call him Lord, saying,
44 The Lord said unto my :Lord,
Sit on my right,
Till I put thine :enemies underneath thy :feet?
45 If David then calleth him Lord, how is he his son? 46 And no one could
answer him a word, neither durst any man from that :day question him any
more.

Chapter 23
1 Then spake :Jesus to the crowds and to his :disciples, 2 saying,
The scribes and the Pharisees sit on the seat of Moses: 3 all things
therefore whatever they tell you, do and keep: but do not after their :works;
for they say, and do not. 4 Yea, they bind heavy burdens and lay them on
the :shoulders of men; but themselves will not to move them with
their :finger. 5 But all their :works they do to be seen of :men: for they
broaden their phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of their garments, 6 and
love the chief place at the feasts, and the chief seats in the synagogues,
7 and the salutations in the markets, and to be called of :men, Rabbei. 8 But
be not ye called Rabbei: for one is your :teacher, and all ye are brethren.
9 And call no one your father on the earth: for one is your :Father, the
heavenly one. 10 Neither be called masters: for one is your master, the
Christ. 11 But the greater among you shall be your minister. 12 And
whoever shall exalt himself shall be humbled; and whoever shall humble
himself shall be exalted. 14 But woe to you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! because ye shut the kingdom of the heavens before :men: for YE
enter not in, neither suffer ye those entering in to go in. 15 Woe to you,
scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye compass :sea and :land to make
one proselyte; and when he is become one, ye make him twofold more a
son of geenna than you. 16 Woe to you, blind guides, that say, Whoso shall
swear by the temple, it is nothing; but whoso shall swear by the gold of the
temple, he is debtor. 17 Fools and blind: for which is greater, the gold, or the
temple that hath sanctified the gold? 18 And, Whoso shall swear by the altar,
it is nothing; but whoso shall swear by the gift :upon it, he is debtor. 19 Blind!
for which is greater, the gift, or the altar that sanctifieth the gift? 20 Who
therefore sweareth by the altar, sweareth by it, and by all the things thereon.
21 And who sweareth by the temple, sweareth by it, and by him that dwelleth
therein. 22 And who sweareth by the heaven, sweareth by the throne
of :God, and by the one sitting thereon. 23 Woe to you, scribes and
Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye tithe :mint and :anise and :cummin, and
have left the weightier matters of the law: :judgment and :mercy, and :faith;
but these ye ought to have done, and not to have left those. 24 Blind guides,
straining out the gnat, and swallowing the camel! 25 Woe to you, scribes
and Pharisees, hyprocrites! because ye cleanse the outside of the cup and
of the platter, but within they are full from extortion and excess. 26 Blind
Pharisee, cleanse first the inside of the cup and of the platter, that
its :outside become clean also. 27 Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! for ye are like whited sepulchres, which outwardly appear
beautiful, but inwardly are full of dead men’s bones, and of all uncleanness.
28 Thus ye also outwardly appear righteous unto :men, but inwardly are full
of hypocrisy and lawlessness. 29 Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! because ye build the sepulchres of the prophets, and garnish
the tombs of the righteous, 30 and say, If we had been in the days of
our :fathers, we should not have been partakers with them in the blood of
the prophets. 31 So that ye witness to yourselves, that ye are sons of them
that slew the prophets. 32 Fill YE also up then the measure of your :fathers.
33 Serpents, offspring of vipers, how shall ye escape the judgment
of :geenna? 34 Therefore, lo, I send unto you prophets, and wise men, and
scribes: some of them shall ye kill and crucify; and some of them shall ye
scourge in your :synagogues, and persecute from city to city: 35 that upon
you might come all the righteous blood shed on the earth, from the blood of
Abel the righteous unto the blood of Zachariah son of Barachiah, whom ye
slew between the sanctuary and the altar. 36 Amen I say unto you, All these
things shall come upon this :race. 37 Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killeth
the prophets, and stoneth those sent unto her! how oft would I have
gathered thy :children together, even as a hen gathereth her :chicks under
the wings, and ye would not! 38 Lo, your :house is left unto you. 39 For I say
unto you, Ye shall in no wise see me henceforth, till ye shall say,
Blessed who cometh in the Lord’s name.

Chapter 24
1 And :Jesus went out from the temple, and was going on; and
his :disciples came to him to show him the buildings of the temple. 2 But he
answered and said to them, See ye not all these things? Amen I say unto
you, In no wise shall one stone be left here upon another, that shall not be
thrown down.
3 And as he was sitting on the mount of :Olives, the disciples came to
him privately, saying, Tell us when these things shall be? and what the sign
of thy :presence and consummation of the age? 4 And :Jesus answered
and said to them, Take heed that no one lead you astray. 5 For many shall
come in my :name, saying, I am the Christ; and shall deceive many. 6 And
ye shall hear of wars and rumors of wars; see ye be not troubled: for it must
come to pass; but the end is not yet. 7 For nation shall rise against nation,
and kingdom against kingdom; and famines shall be and earthquakes in
diverse places. 8 But all these are the beginning of travails. 9 Then shall
they deliver you up unto tribulation, and shall kill you: and ye shall be hated
of all the nations for my :name’s sake. 10 And then shall many stumble and
shall deliver up one another, and shall hate one another. 11 And many false
prophets shall arise, and shall deceive many. 12 And because the
lawlessness shall be multiplied, the love of the many shall wax cold. 13 But
who endureth unto the end, the same shall be saved. 14 And this :gospel of
the kingdom shall be preached in the whole inhabited earth for a witness
unto all the nations; and then shall the end come. 15 When therefore ye see
the abomination of :desolation, which was spoken of through Daniel the
prophet, standing in a holy place (let him that readeth understand), 16 then
let them in :Judæa flee unto the mountains: 17 let the one on the housetop
not go down to take out the things in his :house: 18 and let the one in the
field not return back to take his :cloak. 19 But woe to those with child and to
those giving suck in those :days! 20 And pray that your :flight be not in
winter, neither on a sabbath: 21 for then shall be great tribulation, such as
hath not been from the world’s beginning until :now, no, nor ever shall be.
22 And except those :days had been shortened, no flesh would have been
saved: but for the elect’s sake those :days shall be shortened. 23 Then if
any one say to you, Lo, here is the Christ, or, Here; believe not. 24 For false
Christs shall arise and false prophets, and shall show great signs and
wonders; so as to lead astray, if possible, even the elect. 25 Lo, I have told
you before. 26 If therefore they shall say to you, Lo, he is in the wilderness;
go not forth: Lo, in the inner chambers; believe not. 27 For just as the
lightning cometh forth from the east, and is seen even unto the west; so
shall be the presence of the Son of :man. 28 Wheresoever the carcase is,
there will the eagles be gathered. 29 But straightway after the tribulation of
those :days the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her :light,
and the stars shall fall from the heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall
be shaken: 30 and then shall appear the sign of the Son of :man in heaven:
and then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn, and shall see the Son
of :man coming on the clouds of the heaven with power and great glory.
31 And he shall send forth his :angels with a great trumpet, and they shall
gather together his :elect from the four winds, from the heavens’ ends unto
their :ends. 32 Now from the fig tree learn the parable: when
her :branch is now become tender, and putteth forth the leaves, ye know
that the summer is nigh; 33 thus ye also, when ye see all these things, know
that he is nigh, at the doors. 34 Amen I say unto you, This race shall not
pass away, till all these things come to pass. 35 The heaven and the earth
shall pass away, but my :words shall not pass away. 36 But of that :day and
hour knoweth no one, not even the angels of the heavens, neither the Son,
but the Father only. 37 For just as the days of :Noah, so shall be the
presence of the Son of :man. 38 For as in those :days :before the Flood they
were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, till the day that
Noah entered into the ark, 39 and they knew not until the flood came, and
took all away; so shall be the presence of the Son of :man. 40 Then shall
two be in the field; one is taken along, and one is left: 41 two women grinding
at the mill; one is taken along, and one is left. 42 Watch therefore: for ye
know not what day your :Lord cometh. 43 But know this, that if the
house-master had known what watch the thief was coming, he would have
watched, and would not have suffered his :house to be dug through.
44 Therefore be YE also ready; for in an hour that ye think not the Son
of :man cometh. 45 Who then is the faithful and wise bondman, whom the
lord hath set over his :household, :to give them their food in season?
46 Blessed that :bondman whom his :lord when he cometh shall find so
doing. 47 Amen I say unto you, that he will set him over :all he hath. 48 But
if that evil :bondman shall say in his :heart, My :lord tarrieth; 49 and shall
begin to beat his :fellow-bondmen, and shall eat and drink with the drunken;
50 the lord of that :bondman shall come in a day when he expecteth not, and
in an hour when he knoweth not, 51 and shall severely scourge him, and
appoint his :portion with the hypocrites: there shall be the weeping and the
gnashing of the teeth.

Chapter 25
1 Then shall the kingdom of the heavens be likened to ten virgins,
who took their own :lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom. 2 And
five of them were foolish, and five wise. 3 For the foolish, when they took
their :lamps, took no oil with them: 4 but the wise took oil in the vessels with
their own :lamps. 5 Now while the bridegroom tarried, all were asleep. 6 But
at midnight there was a cry, Lo, the bridegroom! Come forth to meet him.
7 Then all those :virgins arose, and trimmed their own :lamps. 8 And the
foolish said to the wise, Give us of your :oil; because our :lamps are going
out. 9 But the wise answered, saying, Peradventure there will not be
enough for us and you: go rather to them that sell, and buy for yourselves.
10 And while they went away to buy, the bridegroom came; and those ready
went in with him to the marriage feast: and the door was shut. 11 And
afterward come also the other virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us. 12 But
he answered and said, Amen I say unto you, I know you not. 13 Watch
therefore, for ye know not the day nor the hour. 14 For it is just as when
a man, going into another country, called his own :bondmen, and delivered
to them his :goods. 15 And to one he gave five talents, to another two, to
another one; to each according to his several :ability; and he went into
another country. 16 Straightway who received the five talents went and
traded with them, and gained other five talents. 17 Likewise he of the two
gained other two. 18 But who received the one went away and dug in the
earth, and hid the money of his :lord. 19 Now after a long time the lord of
those :bondmen cometh, and maketh a reckoning with them. 20 And who
received the five talents came and brought other five talents, saying, Lord,
thou deliveredst to me five talents: see, I have gained other five talents.
21 His :lord said to him, Well done, good and faithful bondman: thou hast
been faithful over few things, I will set thee over many; enter into the joy of
thy :lord. 22 And he also of the two talents came and said, Lord, thou
deliveredst to me two talents: see, I have gained other two talents.
23 His :lord said to him, Well done, good and faithful bondman: thou hast
been faithful over few, I will set thee over many; enter into the joy of thy :lord.
24 And he also that had received the one talent came and said, Lord, I knew
thee that thou art a hard man, reaping where thou didst not sow, and
gathering whence thou didst not scatter; 25 and I was afraid, and went away
and hid thy :talent in the earth: see, thou hast :thine own. 26 But his :lord
answered and said to him: Wicked and slothful bondman, thou knewest that
I reap where I sowed not, and gather whence I scattered not; 27 thou
oughtest therefore to have put my :moneys to the bankers, and at my
coming I should have received back :mine with interest. 28 Take away
therefore the talent from him, and give to him that hath the ten talents.
29 For unto every one that hath shall be given, and he shall abound: but
from him that hath not, even what he hath shall be taken away. 30 And cast
out the unprofitable bondman into the outer :darkness: there shall be the
weeping and the gnashing of the teeth. 31 But when the Son of :man
shall come in his :glory, and all the angels with him, then shall he sit on the
throne of his glory: 32 and before him shall be gathered all the nations: and
he shall separate them one from another, just as the shepherd separateth
the sheep from the goats; 33 and he shall set the sheep on his right, but the
goats on the left. 34 Then shall the King say to them on his right, Come, ye
blessed of my :Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the world’s
foundation: 35 for I was hungry, and ye gave me to eat; I was thirsty, and ye
gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me in; 36 naked, and ye
clothed me; I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in prison, and ye came unto
me. 37 Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we
thee hungry, and fed thee? or athirst, and gave thee drink? 38 And when
saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee?
39 And when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee? 40 And
the King shall answer and say to them, Amen I say unto you, Inasmuch as
ye did it unto one of these my :brethren, these least, ye did it unto me.
41 Then shall he say also to them on the left, Depart from me, ye cursed,
into the eternal :fire :prepared for the devil and his :angels: 42 for I was
hungry, and ye gave me no meat; and I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink;
43 I was a stranger, and ye took me not in; naked, and ye clothed me not;
sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not. 44 Then shall they also answer,
saying, Lord, when saw we thee hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, or naked,
or sick, or in prison, and did not minister to thee? 45 Then shall he answer
them, saying, Amen I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye did it not unto one of
these :least, ye did it neither unto me. 46 And these shall go away into
eternal punishment: but the righteous into eternal life.

Chapter 26
1 And it came to pass, when :Jesus finished all these :words, he said
to his :disciples, 2 Ye know that after two days the passover cometh, and
the Son of :man is delivered up to be crucified. 3 Then were gathered
the chief priests, and the elders of the people, to the court of the high
priest :called Caiaphas; 4 and they took counsel together that they might
take :Jesus by subtlety, and kill him. 5 But they said, Not during the feast,
that no tumult arise among the people.
6 Now when :Jesus was in Bethany, in Simon the leper’s house, 7 a
woman came to him having an alabaster cruse of exceeding precious
ointment, and poured it upon his :head, as he sat at meat. 8 But the
disciples seeing it were indignant, saying, For what is this :waste? 9 For this
should have been sold for much, and given to the poor. 10 But :Jesus
perceiving it said to them, Why trouble ye the woman? for she hath wrought
a good work upon me. 11 For ye have the poor always with yourselves; but
me ye have not always. 12 For in that she poured this :ointment upon
my :body, she did it to prepare me for :burial. 13 Amen I say unto you,
Wherever this :gospel shall be preached in the whole world, what this
woman hath done shall also be spoken of for a memorial of her.
14 Then one of the twelve, the one called Judas Iscariot, went unto the chief
priests, 15 and said, What are ye willing to give me, and I will deliver him to
you? And they weighed him thirty silver-pieces. 16 And from then on he
sought opportunity to deliver him.
17 Now on the first of the unleavened days the disciples came
to :Jesus, saying, Where wilt thou that we make ready for thee to eat the
passover? 18 And he said, Go into the city to :such a one, and say to him,
The Teacher saith, My season is at hand; I keep the passover at thy house
with my :disciples. 19 And the disciples did as :Jesus appointed them; and
made ready the passover. 20 Now when even was come, he was sitting
at meat with the twelve; 21 and as they were eating, he said, Amen I say
unto you, that one of you shall deliver me up. 22 And they, exceeding
sorrowful, began each to say to him, Is it I, Lord? 23 And he answered and
said, Who dipped the hand with me in the dish, the same shall deliver me up.
24 The Son of :man goeth, even as is written of him: but woe to that :man
through whom the Son of :man is delivered up; good were it for him if
that :man had not been born. 25 And Judas, who delivered him up,
answered and said, Is it I, Rabbei? He saith to him, Thou hast said.
26 And as they were eating, :Jesus took bread, and blessed, and brake it;
and gave to the disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is my :body. 27 And he
took a cup, and gave thanks, and gave to them, saying, All ye drink of it;
28 for this is my :blood of the covenant, :poured out for many unto remission
of sins. 29 But I say unto you, I shall not drink henceforth of this :fruit of the
vine, till that :day when I drink it new with you in my :Father’s :kingdom.
30 And having sung a hymn, they went out into the mount of :Olives.
31 Then saith :Jesus to them, All ye shall stumble in me this :night: for it is
written, I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be
scattered abroad. 32 But after I am raised up, I will go before you
into :Galilee. 33 But :Peter answered and said to him, If all shall stumble in
thee, I will never stumble. 34 :Jesus said to him, Amen I say unto thee, that
this :night, before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice. 35 :Peter saith
to him, Even if I must die with thee, I shall in nowise deny thee. Likewise
also said all the disciples.
36 Then cometh :Jesus with them unto an enclosure called
Gethsemane, and saith to the disciples, Sit here, while I go yonder and pray.
37 And he took with him :Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and began to
be sorrowful and sore troubled. 38 Then saith he to them, My :soul is
exceeding sorrowful, unto death: abide here, and watch with me. 39 And he
went forward a little, and fell on his face, praying, and saying, My Father, if it
is possible, let this :cup pass from me: nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou
wilt. 40 And he cometh unto the disciples, and findeth them sleeping, and
saith to :Peter, Had ye thus no strength to watch with me one hour?
41 Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation: the spirit indeed is
willing, but the flesh is weak. 42 And again a second time he went away,
and prayed, saying, My Father, if this cannot pass except I drink it, thy :will
be done. 43 And he came again and found them sleeping, for their :eyes
were heavy. 44 And he left them again and went away, and prayed a third
time, saying the same word again. 45 Then cometh he unto the disciples,
and saith to them, Sleep on now, and rest: lo, the hour is at hand, and the
Son of :man is delivered up into the hands of sinners. 46 Arise, let us be
going: lo, he is at hand that delivereth me up. 47 And while he yet spake,
lo, Judas, one of the twelve, came, and with him a great crowd with swords
and staves, from the chief priests and elders of the people. 48 Now who
delivered him up gave them a sign, saying, Whomever I shall kiss, HE it is:
take him. 49 And straightway he came to :Jesus, and said, Hail, Rabbei;
and kissed him much. 50 And :Jesus said to him, Friend, do for what thou
art come. Then they came and laid :hands on :Jesus, and took him. 51 And
lo, one of those with Jesus stretched out his :hand, and drew his :sword,
and smote the bondman of the high priest, and struck off his :ear. 52 Then
saith :Jesus to him, Turn back thy :sword into its :place: for all that take the
sword shall perish by the sword. 53 Or thinkest thou that I cannot beseech
my :Father, and he shall even now send me more than twelve legions of
angels? 54 How then should the scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be?
55 In that :hour said :Jesus to the crowds, Are ye come out as against a
robber with swords and staves to seize me? I sat daily in the temple
teaching, and ye took me not. 56 But all this is come, that the scriptures of
the prophets be fulfilled. Then all the disciples left him, and fled.
57 But those who had taken :Jesus led him away to Caiaphas the
high priest, where the scribes and the elders were gathered. 58 But :Peter
followed him from afar unto the court of the high priest, and entered in, and
sat with the officers, to see the end. 59 Now the chief priests and the whole
Sanhedrin were seeking false witness against :Jesus, that they might put
him to death; 60 and they found it not, though many false witnesses came.
But afterward came two, 61 and said, This man said, I can destroy the
temple of :God, and build it in three days. 62 And the high priest stood up,
and said to him, Answerest thou nothing? what witness these against thee?
63 But :Jesus was silent. And the high priest said to him, I adjure thee by the
living :God, that thou tell us whether thou art the Christ, the Son of :God.
64 :Jesus saith to him, Thou hast said: nevertheless I say unto you,
Henceforth ye shall see the Son of :man sitting at the right of the Power, and
coming on the clouds of :heaven. 65 Then the high priest rent his :garments,
saying, He hath spoken blasphemy: what further need have we of
witnesses? see, now ye have heard the blasphemy: 66 what think ye? They
answered and said, He is worthy of death. 67 Then they spit in his :face and
buffeted him: and some slapped him, 68 saying, Prophesy to us, thou Christ:
who is he that struck thee? 69 Now :Peter was sitting without in the
court: and one maid came to him, saying, Thou also wast with Jesus the
Galilæan. 70 But he denied before all, saying, I know not what thou sayest.
71 And when he was gone out into the porch, another saw him, and saith to
those there, This man was with Jesus the Nazorean. 72 And again he
denied with an oath [that], I know not the man. 73 And after a little they that
stood by came and said to :Peter, Truly thou also art one of them; thy very
speech bewrayeth thee. 74 Then began he to curse and to swear [that], I
know not the man. And straightway a cock crew. 75 And :Peter
remembered the word Jesus had said [that], Before the cock crow, thou
shalt deny me thrice. And he went out, and wept bitterly.

Chapter 27
1 Now when morn was come, all the chief priests and the elders of
the people took counsel against :Jesus to put him to death: 2 and they
bound and led him away, and delivered him up to Pilate the governor.
3 Then Judas, who delivered him up, seeing that he was condemned,
repented himself, and brought back the thirty silver-pieces to the chief
priests and elders, 4 saying, I have sinned in that I delivered up righteous
blood. But they said, What is that to us? see thou to it. 5 And he cast down
the silver-pieces into the sanctuary, and withdrew; and he went away and
hanged himself. 6 And the chief priests took the pieces of silver, and said, It
is not lawful to put them into the treasury, since it is the price of blood. 7 And
they took counsel, and bought with them the field of the potter, to
bury :strangers in. 8 Wherefore that :field was called, Field of blood, unto
this day. 9 Then was fulfilled what was spoken through Jeremiah the
prophet, saying, And they took the thirty silver-pieces, the price of him that
was priced, whom they priced on the part of the sons of Israel; 10 and gave
them for the potter’s :field, as the Lord appointed me. 11 Now :Jesus
stood before the governor: and the governor asked him, saying, Art thou the
King of the Jews? And :Jesus said, Thou sayest. 12 And when he was
accused by the chief priests and elders, he answered nothing. 13 Then
saith :Pilate to him, Hearest thou not how many things they witness against
thee? 14 And he gave him no answer, not even to one word: so that the
governor marvelled greatly. 15 Now at a feast the governor was wont to
release unto the crowd one prisoner, whom they would. 16 And they had
then a notable prisoner, called Barabbas. 17 When therefore they were
gathered :Pilate said to them, Whom will ye that I release to
you? :Barabbas, or Jesus the one called Christ? 18 For he knew that for
envy they had delivered him up. 19 And while he was sitting on the
judgment-seat, his :wife sent unto him, saying, Have thou nothing to do with
that :righteous man; for I have suffered many things today in a dream
because of him. 20 Now the chief priests and the elders persuaded the
crowds that they should ask for :Barabbas, and destroy :Jesus. 21 But the
governor answered and said to them, Which of the two will ye that I release
to you? And they said, :Barabbas. 22 :Pilate saith to them, What then shall
I do to Jesus the one called Christ? All say, Let him be crucified. 23 And he
said, Why, what evil hath he done? But they cried out exceedingly, saying,
Let him be crucified. 24 So :Pilate seeing that he prevailed nothing, but
rather that a tumult was arising, took water, and washed his :hands before
the crowd, saying, I am innocent of this :blood, see ye to it. 25 And all the
people answered and said, His :blood be upon us, and upon our :children.
26 Then released he to them :Barabbas; but :Jesus he scourged and
delivered to be crucified.
27 Then the soldiers of the governor took :Jesus into the Prætorium,
and gathered unto him the whole band. 28 And they stripped him and put on
him a scarlet robe. 29 And they platted a crown of thorns and put it on
his :head, and a reed in his :right hand; and they kneeled before him, and
mocked him, saying, Hail, King of the Jews! 30 And they spat upon him, and
took the reed and smote him on the head. 31 And when they had mocked
him, they stripped him of the robe, and put on him his :garments, and led
him away to :crucify him. 32 And coming out, they found a man of
Cyrēnē, Simon by name: him they compelled to go, that he bear his :cross.
33 And when they came unto a place called Golgotha, that is to say, Place of
a skull, 34 they gave him wine to drink mingled with gall: and having tasted it,
he would not drink. 35 And having crucified him, they parted his :garments
among them, casting a lot; 36 and they sat and watched him there. 37 And
they set up over his :head his :accusation written, THIS IS JESUS THE KING
OF THE JEWS. 38 Then are crucified with him two robbers, one on the right
and one on the left. 39 And who passed by railed on him, wagging
their :heads, 40 and saying, Thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it
in three days, save thyself: if thou art :God’s Son, come down from the cross.
41 Likewise also, the chief priests mocking, with the scribes and elders, said,
42 He saved others; himself he cannot save. He is King of Israel; let him
now come down from the cross, and we will believe on him. 43 He trusteth
on :God; let him deliver him now, if he desireth him: for he said [that] I am
God’s Son. 44 And the robbers also that were crucified with him cast upon
him the same reproach. 45 Now from the sixth hour darkness was over
all the earth until the ninth hour. 46 And about the ninth hour :Jesus cried
with a loud voice, saying, Elōi, Eloi, lema sabachthanei? that is, My God, my
God, why didst thou forsake me? 47 And some of them that stood there,
when they heard it, said [that], This man calleth Elijah. 48 And straightway
one of them ran, and took a sponge, and filled it with vinegar, and put it on a
reed, and gave him to drink. 49 And the rest said, Let be; let us see whether
Elijah cometh to save him. 50 And :Jesus cried again with a loud voice, and
yielded up his :spirit. 51 And lo, the veil of the temple was rent in two from
top to bottom; and the earth shook; and the rocks were rent; 52 and the
tombs were opened; and many bodies of the saints that had fallen asleep
were raised; 53 and coming forth from the tombs after his :resurrection
entered into the holy city and appeared unto many. 54 Now the centurion,
and they that were with him watching :Jesus, when they saw the earthquake,
and the things done, feared exceedingly, saying, Truly this was a Son of
God. 55 And many women were there beholding from afar, who had
followed :Jesus from :Galilee, ministering to him: 56 among whom was
Mariam :Magdalēnē, and Mary the mother of :James and Joseph, and the
mother of the sons of Zebedee.
57 And when even was come, a rich man came from Arimathæa,
Joseph by name, who also himself was a disciple of Jesus: 58 this man went
to :Pilate, and asked for the body of :Jesus. Then :Pilate commanded it to
be given up. 59 And :Joseph took the body, and wrapped it in a clean linen
cloth, 60 and laid it in his own new :tomb, which he had hewn out in the rock:
and he rolled a great stone to the door of the tomb, and departed. 61 And
Mariam :Magdalene was there, and the other Mary, sitting over against the
sepulchre. 62 Now on the morrow, which is the day after the
Preparation, the chief priests and the Pharisees were gathered unto Pilate,
63 saying, Sir, we remember that that :deceiver said while yet alive, After
three days I rise again. 64 Command therefore that the sepulchre be made
secure until the third day, lest haply the disciples come and steal him, and
say to the people, He is risen from the dead: and the last error will be worse
than the first. 65 :Pilate said to them, ye have a guard: go, make it as secure
as ye can. 66 So they went, and made the sepulchre sure, having sealed
the stone, with the guard there.

Chapter 28
1 Now late in the week, as it began to dawn toward the first of the
week, came Mariam :Magdalene and the other Mary to view the sepulchre.
2 And lo, there was a great earthquake; for the Lord’s angel descended from
heaven, and came and rolled away the stone, and sat upon it. 3 And
his :appearance was as lightning, and his :raiment white as snow: 4 and
for :fear of him the watchers did quake, and became as dead. 5 And the
angel answered and said to the women, Fear not YE; for I know that ye seek
Jesus the crucified one. 6 He is not here; for he is risen, even as he said.
Come, see the place where he lay. 7 And go quickly, and tell his :disciples
that He is risen from the dead; and lo, he goeth before you into :Galilee;
there shall ye see him: lo, I have told you. 8 And they departed quickly from
the tomb with fear and great joy, and ran to report to his :disciples. 9 And lo,
Jesus met them, saying, Hail! And they came and took hold of his :feet, and
worshipped him. 10 Then saith :Jesus to them, Fear not: go, report to
my :brethren that they depart into :Galilee, and there shall they see me.
11 Now while they were going, lo, some of the guard came into the city, and
reported to the chief priests all the things that were come to pass. 12 And
when they were gathered with the elders, and had taken counsel, they gave
enough silver-pieces to the soldiers, 13 saying, Say [that], His :disciples
came by night, and stole him while we slept. 14 And if this come to a hearing
before the governor, we will persuade him, and rid you of care. 15 And THEY
took the money, and did as they were taught: and this :saying was spread
abroad among the Jews, until this very :day. 16 But the eleven disciples
went to :Galilee, unto the mountain where :Jesus had appointed them.
17 And when they saw him, they worshipped him; but some doubted.
18 And :Jesus came to them and spake to them, saying, All authority hath
been given me in heaven and on :earth. 19 Go therefore, and disciple all the
nations, baptizing them into the name of the Father and of the Son and of
the Holy Spirit: 20 teaching them to keep all things whatsoever I
commanded you: and lo, I am with you all the days till the consummation of
the age.

ACCORDING TO MARK

Chapter 1
1 A BEGINNING of the gospel of Jesus Christ.
2 Even as it is written in :Isaiah the prophet:
Lo, I send my :messenger before thy face,
Who shall prepare thy :way;
3 A voice of one crying in the wilderness,
Make ye ready the way of the Lord,
Make his :paths straight;—
4 John came, who was baptizing in the wilderness and preaching a baptism
of repentance unto remission of sins. 5 And all the country of Judæa went
out unto him, and all they of Jerusalem; and were baptized of him in the river
Jordan, confessing their :sins. 6 And :John was clothed with camel’s hair
and a leather girdle about his :loin; and was eating locusts and wild honey.
7 And he preached, saying, After me cometh the one mightier than I, the
latchet of whose :shoes I am not fit to stoop down and unloose. 8 I baptized
you with water; but he shall baptize you with the Holy Spirit.
9 It came to pass in those :days, that Jesus came from Nazareth
of :Galilee, and was baptized of John into the Jordan. 10 And straightway
coming up out of the water, he saw the heavens being rent, and the Spirit as
a dove descending upon him: 11 and a voice came out of the heavens, Thou
art my :beloved :Son, in thee I am well pleased. 12 And straightway the
Spirit driveth him forth into the wilderness. 13 And he was in the wilderness
forty days tempted of :Satan; and he was with the beasts; and the angels
were ministering to him.
14 And after :John was delivered up, :Jesus came into :Galilee,
preaching the gospel of :God, 15 and saying [that], The season is fulfilled,
and the kingdom of :God is at hand: repent ye, and believe in the Gospel.
16 And passing along by the sea of :Galilee, he saw Simon and Andrew the
brother of Simon casting a net in the sea; for they were fishers.
17 And :Jesus said to them, Come after me, and I will make you to become
fishers of men. 18 And straightway they left the nets, and followed him.
19 And going on a little, he saw James the son of :Zebedee, and John
his :brother, who also were in the boat mending the nets. 20 And
straightway he called them: and they left their :father Zebedee in the boat
with the hired servants, and went after him.
21 And they go into Capernaum; and straightway on the sabbath he
entered into the synagogue and taught. 22 And they were astonished at
his :teaching: for he was teaching them as having authority, and not as the
scribes. 23 And straightway there was in their :synagogue a man with an
unclean spirit; and he cried out, 24 saying, What have we to do with thee,
Jesus Nazarene? art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art,
the Holy One of :God. 25 And :Jesus rebuked him, saying, Be silent, and
come out of him. 26 And the unclean :spirit, convulsing him and crying with
a loud voice, came out of him. 27 And all were amazed, so that they
questioned among themselves saying, What is this? a new teaching! with
authority he commandeth even the unclean :spirits, and they obey him.
28 And the report of him went out straightway everywhere into all the region
of :Galilee round about. 29 And straightway, when they were come out
of the synagogue, they came into the house of Simon and Andrew, with
James and John. 30 Now Simon’s :mother-in-law lay in a fever; and
straightway they tell him of her: 31 and he came and took her by the hand,
and raised her up; and the fever left her, and she ministered to them.
32 And at even, when the sun did set, they brought unto him all the ailing
and the demoniacs. 33 And all the city was gathered together at the door.
34 And he healed many ailing with diverse sicknesses, and cast out many
demons; and he suffered not the demons to speak, because they knew him
to be Christ. 35 And in the morning, long before day, he arose and went
out, and went off into a desert place, and was praying there. 36 And Simon
and those with him followed after him; 37 and they found him, and say to him
[that] All are seeking thee. 38 And he saith to them, Let us go elsewhere into
the next towns, that I may preach there also; for to this end came I forth.
39 And he went into their :synagogues throughout all :Galilee, preaching
and casting out the demons.
40 And a leper cometh unto him, beseeching him, and kneeling down,
and saying to him [that] If thou wilt, thou canst cleanse me. 41 And in pity he
stretched forth his :hand, and touched him, and saith to him, I will; be thou
cleansed. 42 And straightway the leprosy departed from him, and he was
cleansed. 43 And he strictly charged him, and straightway sent him out,
44 and saith to him, See thou say nothing to any one: but go show thyself to
the priest, and offer for thy :cleansing the things which Moses commanded,
for a witness to them. 45 But he went out, and began to publish it much, and
to spread abroad the matter, insomuch that he could no more openly enter
into a city, but was without in desert places: and they came unto him from
everywhere.

Chapter 2
1 And when he entered again into Capernaum after some days, it
was noised about that he was in the house. 2 And many were gathered, so
that there was no longer room for them, no, not even :about the door: and
he spake the word to them. 3 And they come, bringing unto him a paralytic,
borne of four. 4 And unable to bring him to him for the crowd, they unroofed
the roof where he was: and when they had broken it up, they let down the
bed whereon the paralytic lay. 5 And :Jesus seeing their :faith saith to the
paralytic, Child, thy :sins are forgiven. 6 But certain of the scribes were
sitting there, and reasoning in their :hearts, 7 Why speaketh this man thus?
he blasphemeth: who can forgive sins but one, :God? 8 And
straightway :Jesus, perceiving in his :spirit that they so reasoned within
themselves, saith to them, Why reason ye these things in your :hearts?
9 Which is easier, to say to the paralytic, Thy :sins are forgiven; or to say,
Arise, and take up thy :bed, and walk? 10 But that ye may know that the Son
of :man hath authority on the earth to forgive sins (he saith to the paralytic),
11 I say unto thee, Arise, take up thy :bed, and go to thy :house. 12 And he
arose, and straightway took up the bed, and went forth before them all; so
that all were amazed, and glorified :God, saying [that] We never saw the
like.
13 And he went forth again by the sea; and all the crowd was coming
unto him, and he was teaching them. 14 And passing by, he saw Levi the
son of :Alphæus sitting at the toll, and saith to him, Follow me. And he
arose and followed him. 15 And it cometh to pass, that he is sitting at
meat in his :house, and many publicans and sinners were sitting down
with :Jesus and his :disciples: for they were many, and they followed him.
16 And the scribes of the Pharisees, seeing that he was eating with the
sinners and publicans, were saying to his :disciples, How is it that he was
eating and drinking with publicans and sinners? 17 And when :Jesus heard
it, he saith to them [that] The healthy have no need of a healer, but the ailing:
I came not to call the righteous, but sinners. 18 And the disciples
of :John and the Pharisees were fasting: and they come and say to him,
Why do the disciples of :John and the disciples of the Pharisees fast, but
thy :disciples fast not? 19 And :Jesus said to them, Can the sons of the
bride-chamber fast, while the bridegroom is with them? what time they have
the bridegroom with them, they cannot fast. 20 But days will come, when
the bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and then will they fast in
that :day. 21 No one seweth a patch of undressed cloth upon an old
garment: else what should fill it up taketh from it, the new from the old, and a
worse rent is made. 22 And no one putteth fresh wine into old wine-skins;
else the wine will burst the skins, and the wine is lost, and the skins: but
fresh wine is for new wine-skins.
23 And it came to pass, that he was going on the sabbath[s] through
the grainfields; and his :disciples began, as they went, to pluck the ears.
24 And the Pharisees said to him, See, why do they on the sabbath[s] what
is not lawful? 25 And he saith to them, Did ye never read what David did,
when he had need, and was hungry, he, and those :with him? 26 How he
entered into the house of :God at the time of high priest Abiathar, and ate
the show-:loaves, which it is not lawful to eat save for the priests, and gave
also to them that were with him? 27 And he said to them, The sabbath was
made for :man, and not :man for the sabbath: 28 so that the Son of :man is
lord also of the sabbath.

Chapter 3
1 And he entered again into a synagogue; and a man was there who
had his :hand withered. 2 And they watched him, whether he would heal
him on the sabbath[s]; that they might accuse him. 3 And he saith to the
man that had his :hand withered, Stand forth. 4 And he saith to them, Is it
lawful on the sabbath[s] to do good, or to do evil? to save life, or to kill? But
they were silent. 5 And when he had looked round about on them with
anger, being grieved at the hardening of their :heart, he saith to the man,
Stretch forth thy :hand. And he stretched forth; and his :hand was restored.
6 And the Pharisees went out, and straightway with the Herodians took
counsel against him, how they might destroy him.
7 And :Jesus with his :disciples withdrew unto the sea: and a great
multitude from :Galilee followed; and from :Judæa, 8 and from Jerusalem,
and from :Idumæa, and beyond the Jordan, and about Tyre and Sidon, a
great multitude, hearing what great things he did, came unto him. 9 And he
spake to his disciples, that a little boat wait on him because of the crowd,
lest they throng him: 10 for he had healed many; so that as many as had
scourges pressed upon him that they might touch him. 11 And the
unclean :spirits, whensoever they beheld him, fell down before him, and
cried, saying, Thou art the Son of :God. 12 And he charged them much that
they should not make him manifest. 13 And he goeth up into the
mountain, and calleth unto him whom he himself would; and they went away
unto him. 14 And he appointed twelve whom he also named apostles, that
they be with him, and that he send them forth to preach, 15 and to have
authority to cast out :demons: 16 and he appointed the twelve (and
surnamed :Simon) Peter, 17 and James the son of :Zebedee, and John the
brother of :James (and surnamed them Boanērges, which is, Sons of
thunder): 18 and Andrew, and Philip, and Bartholomew, and Matthew, and
Thomas, and James, the son of :Alphæus, and Thaddæus and Simon the
Cananæan, 19 and Judas Iscariot, who also delivered him up. And he
cometh into a house. 20 And the crowd cometh together again, so that they
could not even eat bread. 21 And when :his friends heard it, they went out to
lay hold on him: for they said that he is beside himself. 22 And the scribes
that came down from Jerusalem were saying that he hath Beelzebul, and
that by the prince of the demons casteth he out the demons. 23 And he
called them unto him, and said to them in parables, How can Satan cast out
Satan? 24 And if a kingdom be divided against itself, that :kingdom cannot
stand. 25 And if a house be divided against itself, that :house will not be
able to stand. 26 And if :Satan hath risen up against himself, and is divided,
he cannot stand, but hath an end. 27 But no one can enter into the house of
the strong, and spoil his goods, except he first bind the strong, and then he
will spoil his :house. 28 Amen I say unto you, [that] All things shall be
forgiven unto the sons of :men, the sins and the blasphemies wherewith
soever they shall blaspheme: 29 but whoso shall blaspheme against the
Holy :Spirit hath not forgiveness unto the age, but is guilty of an eternal sin:
30 because they were saying, He hath an unclean spirit. 31 And
his :mother and his :brethren come; and, standing without, sent unto him,
calling him. 32 And a crowd was sitting about him; and they say to him, Lo,
thy :mother and thy :brethren without seek for thee. 33 And he answered
them, and saith, Who is my :mother and my :brethren? 34 And looking
round on them that sat round him in a circle, he saith, See, :my mother and
my :brethren! 35 whosoever shall do the will of :God, the same is my brother
and sister and mother.

Chapter 4
1 And again he began to teach by the sea. And a great crowd is
gathered unto him, so that he entered into a boat, and sat in the sea; and all
the crowd were close by the sea on the land. 2 And he taught them many
things in parables, and said to them in his :teaching, 3 Hearken: Lo, the
sower went forth to sow: 4 and it came to pass, as he sowed, some seed fell
by the way side, and the birds came and devoured it. 5 And other fell on the
rocky ground, and where it had not much earth; and straightway it sprang up,
because it had no depth of earth: 6 and when the sun was risen, it was
scorched; and because it had no root, withered away. 7 And other fell
among the thorns, and the thorns grew up, and choked it, and it yielded no
fruit. 8 And others fell into the good :ground, and yielded fruit growing up
and increasing; and brought forth [unto] thirty and [in] sixty and [in] hundred.
9 And he said, Who hath ears to hear, let him hear. 10 And when he was
alone, they that were about him with the twelve asked of him the parables.
11 And he said to them, To you is given the mystery of the kingdom of :God:
but to those without, :all things are done in parables:
12 that looking they may look, and not see,
and hearing they may hear, and not understand;
lest haply they should turn again, and it be forgiven them.
13 And he saith to them, Know ye not this :parable? and how shall ye know
all the parables? 14 The sower soweth the word. 15 And these are they by
the way side, where the word is sown; and when they should hear,
straightway cometh :Satan, and taketh away the word :sown in them.
16 And these likewise are they sown upon the rocky places, who, when they
should hear the word, straightway receive it with joy; 17 and have no root in
themselves, but endure a while; then when tribulation or persecution ariseth
because of the word, straightway they stumble. 18 And others are they
sown among the thorns; these are they that have heard the word, 19 and the
cares of the age, and the deceitfulness of :riches, and the lusts of :other
things entering in, choke the word, and it becometh unfruitful. 20 And those
are they that were sown upon the good :ground; such as hear the word, and
receive it, and bear fruit [in] thirty and [in] sixty and [in] hundred. 21 And
he said to them [that], Is the lamp brought to be put under the bushel, or
under the bed, and not to be put on the stand? 22 For nothing is hid, save
that it be manifested; neither was anything made secret, but that it come to
light. 23 If any hath ears to hear, let him hear. 24 And he said to them,
Look to what ye hear: with what measure ye measure it shall be measured
to you; and shall be added to you. 25 For who hath, to him shall be given:
and who hath not, from him shall be taken away even what he hath.
26 And he said, So is the kingdom of :God, as if a man cast :seed upon the
earth; 27 and sleep and rise night and day, and the seed spring up and grow,
himself knoweth not how. 28 The earth beareth fruit of herself; first a blade,
then an ear, then full grain in the ear. 29 But when the fruit is ripe,
straightway he putteth forth the sickle, because the harvest is come.
30 And he said, How shall we liken the kingdom of :God? or in what parable
shall we set it forth? 31 Like a grain of mustard seed, which, when it is sown
upon the earth, though it is a lesser among all the seeds of those on the
earth, 32 yet when it is sown, groweth up, and becometh greater than all the
herbs, and putteth out great branches; so that the birds of the heaven can
lodge under its :shadow.
33 And with many such parables spake he the word to them, as they were
able to hear it; 34 and without parable spake he not to them: but privately to
his private :disciples he expounded all things.
35 And on that :day, when even was come, he saith to them, Let us
go over unto the other side. 36 And leaving the crowd, they take him with
them, as he was, in the boat. And other boats were with him. 37 And a great
storm of wind ariseth, and the waves beat into the boat, so that the boat was
now filling. 38 And himself was in the stern, asleep on the cushion: and they
rouse him, and say to him, Teacher, carest thou not that we perish? 39 And
he awoke, and rebuked the wind, and said to the sea, Quiet, be still. And
the wind ceased, and there was a great calm. 40 And he said to them, Why
are ye fearful? have ye not yet faith? 41 And they feared a great fear, and
said one to another, Who then is this, that both the wind obeys him and the
sea?

Chapter 5
1 And they came to the other side of the sea, into the country of the
Gerasenes. 2 And when he was come out of the boat, straightway there
met him out of the tombs a man with an unclean spirit, 3 who had
his :dwelling in the tombs: and no one could any more bind him, no, not with
a chain; 4 because that he had been often bound with fetters and chains,
and the chains had been rent asunder by him, and the fetters broken in
pieces: and no one had strength to tame him. 5 And always, night and day,
in the tombs and in the mountains, he was crying out, and cutting himself
with stones. 6 And seeing :Jesus from afar, he ran and worshipped him;
7 and crying out with a loud voice, saith, What have I to do with thee, Jesus,
Son of the Most High :God? I adjure thee by :God, torment me not. 8 For he
said to him, Come forth, :unclean :spirit, out of the man. 9 And he asked him,
What is thy name? And he saith to him, My name is Legion; for we are
many. 10 And he besought him much that he would not send them away out
of the country. 11 Now there on the mountain side a great herd of swine was
feeding. 12 And they besought him, saying, Send us into the swine, that we
may enter into them. 13 And he gave them leave. And the unclean :spirits
came out, and entered into the swine: and the herd rushed down the steep
into the sea, about two thousand; and they were drowned in the sea. 14 And
they that fed them fled, and reported it in the city, and in the country. And
they came to see what it was that had come to pass. 15 And they come
unto :Jesus, and behold the demoniac sitting, clothed and in his right mind,
him that had the legion: and they were afraid. 16 And they that saw it
rehearsed to them how it befell the demoniac, and concerning the swine.
17 And they began to beseech him to depart from their :borders. 18 And as
he was entering into the boat, the whilom demoniac besought him that he
might be with him. 19 And he suffered him not, but saith to him, Go to
thy :house unto thine own and report to them how great things the Lord hath
done for thee, and he had mercy on thee. 20 And he went away, and began
to publish in :Decapolis how great things :Jesus had done for him: and all
marvelled.
21 And when :Jesus had crossed over again in the boat unto the
other side, a great crowd was gathered unto him; and he was by the sea.
22 And one of the synagogue-rulers cometh, Jairus by name; and seeing
him, falleth at his :feet, 23 and beseecheth him much, saying, My
little :daughter is at death’s point: I pray that thou come and lay :hands on
her, that she be made whole, and live. 24 And he went with him; and a great
crowd followed him, and they thronged him. 25 And a women, who had an
issue of blood twelve years, 26 and had suffered many things of many
healers, and had spent :all she had, and was nothing bettered, but rather
grew worse, 27 having heard the things concerning :Jesus, came in the
crowd behind, and touched his :garment. 28 For she said [that], If I touch
but his :garments, I shall be made whole. 29 And straightway the fountain of
her :blood was dried up; and she knew in her :body that she was healed of
the scourge. 30 And straightway :Jesus, perceiving in himself that the
power proceeding from him had gone forth, turned him about in the crowd,
and said, Who touched my :garments? 31 And his :disciples said to him,
Thou seest the crowd thronging thee, and sayest, Who touched me?
32 And he looked round about to see her that had done this. 33 But the
woman fearing and trembling, knowing what had been done to her, came
and fell down before him, and told him the whole truth. 34 And he said to her,
Daughter, thy :faith hath made thee whole; go unto peace, and be whole of
thy :scourge. 35 While he was yet speaking, they come from the
synagogue-ruler’s house, saying [that] Thy :daughter is dead: why troublest
thou the Teacher any further? 36 But :Jesus, overhearing the word spoken,
saith to the synagogue-ruler, Fear not, only believe. 37 And he suffered no
man to follow with him, save :Peter, and James, and John the brother of
James. 38 And they come to the house of the synagogue-ruler; and he
beholdeth a tumult, and many weeping and wailing greatly. 39 And when he
entered in, he saith to them, Why make ye a tumult, and weep? the child is
not dead, but sleepeth. 40 And they laughed him to scorn. But he, having
put all forth, taketh the father of the child and the mother and those with him,
and goeth in where the child was. 41 And taking the child by the hand, he
saith to her, Talitha Koum; which, being interpreted, is Damsel, I say to thee,
Arise. 42 And straightway the damsel rose up, and walked; for she was
twelve years old. And they were amazed straightway with great
amazement. 43 And he charged them much that no one should know this:
and he spake that something be given her to eat.

Chapter 6
1 And he went out thence; and cometh into his own :country; and
his :disciples follow him. 2 And when Sabbath came, he began to teach in
the synagogue: and the many hearing him were astonished, saying,
Whence hath this man these things? and what the wisdom :given this man,
and what mean :such mighty works wrought by his :hands? 3 Is not this the
carpenter, the son of :Mary, and brother of James, and Joses, and Judas,
and Simon? and are not his :sisters here with us? And they stumbled in him.
4 And :Jesus said to them [that] A prophet is not without honor, save in his
own :country, and among his own :kin, and in his own :house. 5 And he
could there do no mighty work, save that he laid his :hands upon a few sick,
and healed them. 6 And he marvelled because of their :unbelief.
And he went round about the villages teaching. 7 And he calleth to
him the twelve and began to send them forth two by two; and he gave them
authority over the unclean :spirits; 8 and charged them that they take
nothing for the journey, save a staff only; no bread, no wallet, no brass in[to]
the :girdle; 9 but shod with sandals: and, not to put on two coats. 10 And he
said to them, Wherever ye enter into a house, there abide till ye depart
thence. 11 And whatever place receive you not, and they hear you not, as
ye go forth thence, shake off the dust that is under your feet for a witness to
them. 12 And they went out, and preached that men should repent. 13 And
they cast out many demons, and anointed with oil many sick, and cured
them.
14 And :king Herod heard it; for his :name had become known: and
they were saying that John the Baptizer is risen from the dead, and
therefore the powers are working in him. 15 But others said that it is Elijah.
And others said that it is a prophet, as one of the prophets. 16 But :Herod,
when HE heard it, said, John, whom I beheaded, he is risen. 17 For :Herod
himself had sent forth, and laid hold upon :John, and bound him in prison for
the sake of Herodias, the wife of his :brother Philip, because he had married
her. 18 For :John was saying to :Herod [that] It is not lawful for thee to have
the wife of thy :brother. 19 And :Herodias set herself against him, and
wished to kill him; and could not; 20 for :Herod was afraid of :John, knowing
him as a righteous and holy man, and kept him safe. And when he heard
him, he was much perplexed; and heard him gladly. 21 And when a
convenient day was come, when Herod on his :birthday made a supper to
his :lords, and the colonels, and the chief men of :Galilee; 22 and when
his :daughter Herodias came in and danced, she pleased :Herod and his
guests. And the king said to the damsel, Ask me whatever thou wilt, and I
will give thee. 23 And he sware to her, Whatsoever thou shalt ask me, I will
give thee, unto half of my :kingdom. 24 And she went out, and said to
her :mother, What shall I ask? And she said, The head of John the Baptizer.
25 And she came in straightway with haste unto the king, and requested
saying, I will that thou forthwith give me on a platter the head of John the
Baptist. 26 And though the king was very sorry for the sake of his :oaths and
of the guests, he would not refuse her. 27 And straightway the king sent
forth one of his guard, and commanded to bring his :head: and he went
away and beheaded him in the prison, 28 and brought his :head on a platter,
and gave it to the damsel; and the damsel gave it to her :mother. 29 And
when his :disciples heard it, they came and took up his :corpse, and laid it in
a tomb.
30 And the apostles gather together unto :Jesus; and reported to him
all things, whatsoever they had done, and whatsoever they had taught.
31 And he saith to them, Come YE yourselves apart into a desert place, and
rest a little. For many were :coming and :going, and they had no leisure
even to eat. 32 And they went away in the boat to a desert place apart.
33 And they saw them going, and many knew them, and they ran together
there on foot from all the cities, and outwent them. 34 And he came forth
and saw a great crowd, and had compassion on them, because they were
as sheep not having a shepherd: and he began to teach them many things.
35 And when the day was now far spent, his :disciples came to him, and said
[that] The place is desert, and the day is now far spent; 36 send them away,
that they may go into the country and villages round about, and buy
themselves aught to eat. 37 But he answered and said to them, Give YE
them to eat. And they say to him, Shall we go and buy two hundred
shillings’ worth of loaves, and give them to eat? 38 And he saith to them,
How many loaves have ye? go, see. And when they knew, they say, Five,
and two fishes. 39 And he commanded them that all should sit down by
companies upon the green grass. 40 And they sat down in ranks, by
hundreds, and by fifties. 41 And he took the five loaves and the two fishes,
and looked up to :heaven and blessed, and brake the loaves; and gave to
the disciples to set before them; and the two fishes divided he among all.
42 And all ate, and were filled. 43 And they took up broken pieces, twelve
basketfuls, also of the fishes. 44 And they that ate the loaves were five
thousand men. 45 And straightway he constrained his :disciples to
enter into the boat, and to go before him unto the other side unto Bethsaida,
while he himself sendeth the crowd away. 46 And after he had taken leave
of them, he departed into the mountain to pray. 47 And when even was
come, the boat was in the midst of the sea, and he alone on the land.
48 And seeing them distressed in the :rowing, for the wind was contrary to
them, about the fourth watch of the night he cometh unto them, walking on
the sea; and he would have passed by them: 49 but they, when they saw
him walking on the sea, supposed that it was a ghost, and cried out; 50 for
all saw him, and were troubled. But he straightway spake with them, and
saith to them, Be of good cheer: it is I; be not afraid. 51 And he went up unto
them into the boat; and the wind ceased: and they were sore amazed in
themselves; 52 for they understood not concerning the loaves, but
their :heart was hardened. 53 And when they had crossed over to the
land they came unto Gennesaret, and moored to the shore. 54 And when
they came out of the boat, straightway the people knew him, 55 and ran
about that whole :region, and began to carry about on their beds the ailing,
wherever they heard he was. 56 And wherever he entered, into villages, or
into cities, or into the country, they laid the sick in the markets, and
besought him that they might touch if but the border of his of his :garment:
and as many as touched him were made whole.

Chapter 7
1 And the Pharisees gather unto him and certain of the scribes, who
had come from Jerusalem, 2 and seen that some of his disciples ate their
loaves with defiled, that is, unwashen, hands. 3 (For the Pharisees, and all
the Jews, except they wash their hands diligently, eat not, holding the
tradition of the elders; 4 and coming from market, except they sprinkle
themselves, they eat not; and many other things there are, which they have
received to hold, washings of cups, and pots, and brasen vessels.) 5 And
the Pharisees and the scribes ask him, Why walk not thy :disciples
according to the tradition of the elders, but eat :bread with defiled hands?
6 But HE said to them, Isaiah well prophesied of you :hypocrites, as it is
written, [that]
This :people honoreth me with their lips,
But their heart is far from me.
7 But in vain worship they me,
Teaching for doctrines commands of men. 8 Leaving the
commandment of :God, ye hold fast the tradition of :men. 9 And he said to
them, Well ye reject the commandment of :God, that ye may keep
your :tradition. 10 For Moses said, Honor thy :father and thy :mother; and,
Who speaketh evil of father or mother, let him end in death: 11 but ye say, If
a man shall say to his :father or :mother, That wherewith thou mightest have
been profited by me is Corban, which is :Given to God; 12 ye no longer
suffer him to do aught for :father or :mother; 13 making void the word of :God
by your :tradition, which ye have delivered: and many such like ye do.
14 And he called to him the crowd again, and said to them, Hear me all of
you, and understand: 15 there is nothing from without the man, that going
into him can defile him; but the things proceeding out of the man are what
defile the man. 17 And when he entered into the house from the crowd,
his :disciples asked of him the parable. 18 And he saith to them, Are YE so
without understanding also? Perceive ye not, that whatever from without
goeth into the man, it cannot defile him; 19 because it goeth not into
his :heart, but into the belly, and goeth out into the draught? This he said,
making all :meats clean. 20 And he said [that], What proceedeth out of the
man, that defileth the man. 21 For from within, out of the heart of :men,
proceed the evil reasonings, fornications, thefts, murders, adulteries,
22 covetings, wickednesses, guile, lasciviousness, an evil eye, railing, pride,
foolishness: 23 all these evils proceed from within, and defile the man.
24 And from thence he arose, and went away into the borders of Tyre
and Sidon. And he entered into a house, and would have no one know it;
and he could not be hid. 25 But straightway a woman, whose little :daughter
had an unclean spirit, having heard of him, came and fell down at his :feet.
26 Now the woman was a Greek, Syrophoenician by :race. And she asked
him that he cast forth the demon out of her :daughter. 27 And he said to her,
Let thou first the children be filled: for it is not well to take the
children’s :bread and cast it to the dogs. 28 But she answered and saith to
him, Yea, Lord; even the dogs under the table eat of the crumbs of the
children. 29 And he said to her, For this :saying go, the demon is gone out of
thy :daughter. 30 And she went away unto her :house, and found the child
laid upon the bed, and the demon gone out. 31 And again he went out
from the borders of Tyre, and came through Sidon unto the sea of :Galilee,
through the midst of the borders of Decapolis. 32 And they bring to him one
deaf, and with a speech impediment; and they beseech him to lay his :hand
upon him. 33 And he took him aside from the crowd privately, and put
his :fingers into his :ears, and spat, and touched his :tongue; 34 and looking
up to :heaven, he sighed, and saith to him, Ephphatha, that is, Be opened.
35 And his :ears were opened, and the bond of his :tongue was loosed, and
he spake plain. 36 And he charged them that they tell no one: but the more
he charged them, so much the more a great deal THEY published it. 37 And
they were beyond measure astonished, saying, He hath done all things well;
he maketh both deaf to hear, and dumb to speak.

Chapter 8
1 In those :days, when there was again a great crowd, and they had
nothing to eat, he called unto him the disciples, and saith to them, 2 I pity the
crowd, because they continue with me now three days, and have nothing to
eat: 3 and if I dismiss them fasting to their home, they will faint on the way;
and some of them are from far. 4 And his :disciples answered him [that],
Whence shall one be able to fill these men with loaves here in a desert
place? 5 And he asked them, How many loaves have ye? And they said,
Seven. 6 And he commandeth the crowd to sit down on the ground: and he
took the seven loaves, and having given thanks, he brake, and gave to
his :disciples, to set before them; and they set them before the crowd.
7 And they had a few small fishes: and having blessed them, he bid these
also to be set before them. 8 And they ate, and were filled: and they took up
seven hampers of left-over fragments. 9 And they were about four
thousand: and he dismissed them. 10 And straightway he entered into the
boat with his :disciples, and came into the parts of Dalmanutha.
11 And the Pharisees came forth, and began to question with him,
seeking of him a sign from :heaven, trying him. 12 And he sighed deeply in
his :spirit, and saith, Why seeketh this :generation a sign? Amen I say, no
sign shall be given this :generation. 13 And he left them, and again entering
into the boat departed to the other side. 14 And they forgot to take
loaves; and they had not in the boat with them more than one loaf. 15 And
he charged them, saying, See that ye look out for the leaven of the
Pharisees and the leaven of Herod. 16 And they reasoned one with another,
because they have no loaves. 17 And Jesus perceiving it saith to them,
Why reason ye, because ye have no loaves? do ye not yet perceive, neither
understand? have ye your heart hardened? 18 Having eyes, see ye not?
and having ears, hear ye not? and do ye not remember 19 when I brake the
five loaves among the five thousand, how many baskets full of fragments
took ye up? They say to him, Twelve. 20 When the seven among the four
thousand, how many hamperfuls of broken pieces took ye up? And they
say to him, Seven. 21 And he said to them, Do ye not yet understand?
22 And they come unto Bethsaida. And they bring to him a blind man,
and beseech him to touch him. 23 And he took hold of the blind man by the
hand, and brought him out of the village; and when he had spit on his :eyes,
and laid :hands upon him, he asked him, If thou seest aught? 24 And he
looked up, and said, I see :men; for I behold them as trees, walking.
25 Then again he laid :hands upon his :eyes; and he looked stedfastly, and
was restored, and saw all things clearly. 26 And he sent him away to his
home, saying, Enter not even into the village.
27 And :Jesus went forth, and his :disciples, into the villages of
Cæsarea :Philippi: and on the way he asked his :disciples, saying to them,
Who do :men say that I am? 28 And the told him, saying [that], John the
Baptist; and others, Elijah; others, however, that he was one of the prophets.
29 And HE asked them, But who say ye that I am? :Peter answered and
saith to him, Thou art the Christ. 30 And he charged them that they tell no
man of him. 31 And he began to teach them, that the Son of :man must
suffer many things, and be rejected by the elders, and the chief priests, and
the scribes, and be killed, and after three days rise. 32 And he spake the
saying openly. And :Peter took him, and began to rebuke him. 33 But he
turning about, and seeing his :disciples, rebuked Peter, and saith, Get
behind me, Satan, because thou mindest not the things of :God, but the
things of :men. 34 And he called to him the crowd with his :disciples,
and said to them, If any would come after me, let him deny himself, and take
up his :cross, and follow me. 35 For whoso would save his own :life shall
lose it; and whosoever shall lose his :life for my sake and the gospel’s shall
save it. 36 For what doth it profit a man to gain the whole world, and forfeit
his :life? 37 For what should a man give in exchange for his :life? 38 For
whoso shall be ashamed of me and my :words in this :adulterous and
sinful :generation, the Son of :man also shall be ashamed of him, when he
cometh in the glory of his :Father with the holy :angels.

Chapter 9
1 And he said to them, Amen I say unto you, Some are here of those
standing by, who shall in no wise taste of death, till they see the kingdom
of :God come with power.
2 And after six days :Jesus taketh with him :Peter, and :James, and
John, and bringeth them up into a high mountain apart by themselves: and
he was transfigured before them; 3 and his :garments became glistering,
exceeding white, so as no fuller on :earth can whiten them. 4 And Elijah
appeared to them with Moses: and they were talking with :Jesus.
5 And :Peter answereth and saith to :Jesus, Rabbei, it is good for us to be
here: and let us make three tents; for thee one, and for Moses one, and for
Elijah one. 6 For he knew not what to answer; for they became sore afraid.
7 And a cloud came overshadowing them: and a voice came out of the cloud,
This is my :beloved :Son: hear him. 8 And suddenly looking around they
saw no one any more with themselves, save :Jesus only. 9 And as they
were coming down from the mountain, he charged them that they tell no one
what things they had seen, save when the Son of :man should have risen
from the dead. 10 And they kept the saying, questioning among
themselves what the rising from the dead is. 11 And they asked him, saying,
Wherefore say the scribes that Elijah must come first? 12 And he said to
them, Elijah indeed cometh first, and restoreth all things: and how is it
written of the Son of :man, that he suffer many things and be set at nought?
13 But I say unto you, that an Elijah is even come, and they have done to
him whatsoever they would, even as it is written of him.
14 And when they came to the disciples, they saw a great crowd
about them, and scribes questioning with them. 15 And straightway the
whole crowd, when they saw him, were greatly amazed, and running to him
saluted him. 16 And he asked them, What question ye with them? 17 And
one of the crowd answered him, Teacher, I brought unto thee my :son, who
hath a dumb spirit; 18 and wheresoever it seizeth him, it dasheth him down:
and he foameth, and grindeth his :teeth, and pineth away: and I spake to
thy :disciples that they cast it out; and they were unable. 19 And he
answereth them and saith, O faithless generation, how long shall I be with
you? how long shall I bear with you? bring him unto me. 20 And they
brought him unto him: and when he saw him, straightway the spirit
convulses him grievously; and he fell on the ground, and wallowed foaming.
21 And he asked his :father, How long time is it since this hath come to him?
And he said, From a child. 22 And oft-times it hath cast him both into fire
and into waters, to destroy him: but If thou canst do aught have pity on us,
and help us. 23 And :Jesus said to him, As to the If thou canst! All things
are possible to him that believeth. 24 Straightway the father of the little child
cried out, and said, I believe; help mine :unbelief. 25 And :Jesus seeing that
a crowd was running together, rebuked the unclean :spirit, saying to him,
Dumb and deaf :spirit, I command thee, come out of him, and come no more
into him. 26 And having cried out, and convulsed him much, he came out:
and the boy became as one dead; so that the many said [that] He is dead.
27 But :Jesus took him by the hand, and raised him up; and he arose.
28 And when he was come into the house, his :disciples asked him privately,
Why could not we cast it out? 29 And he said to them, This :kind can come
out by nothing, save by prayer.
30 And they went forth thence, and passed through :Galilee; and he
would not that any one know it. 31 For he taught his :disciples, and said to
them [that] The Son of :man is delivered up into men’s hands and they shall
kill him; and when killed shall after three days rise again. 32 But they
understood not the saying, and were afraid to ask him.
33 And they came to Capernaum: and when he was in the house he
asked them, What were ye reasoning on the way? 34 But they were silent:
for they had disputed one with another on the way, who was the greater.
35 And he sat down, and called the twelve, and saith to them, If any would
be first, he shall be last of all, and minister of all. 36 And he took a little child,
and set him in the midst: and taking it in his arms, he said to them, 37 Whoso
receive one of such little :children in my :name, receiveth me: and whoso
receive me, receiveth not me, but him that sent me. 38 :John said to him,
Teacher, we saw one casting out demons in thy :name, and we were
hindering him, because he followed not us. 39 But :Jesus said, Hinder him
not: for there is no one who shall do a mighty work in my :name, and be able
quickly to speak evil of me. 40 For who is not against us is for us. 41 For
whoso shall give you a cup of water to drink, because in name ye are
Christ’s, Amen I say unto you, that he shall in nowise lose his :reward.
42 And whoso should stumble one of these :little ones that believe, better for
him if a great millstone hang about his :neck, and he were cast into the sea.
43 And if thy :hand cause thee to stumble, cut it off: it is good for thee to
enter into the life maimed, rather than having two :hands to go into :geenna,
into the unquenchable :fire. 45 And if thy :foot cause thee to stumble, cut it
off: it is good for thee to enter into the life halt, rather than having two :feet to
be cast into :geenna. 47 And if thine :eye cause thee to stumble, cast it out:
it is good for thee to enter into the kingdom of :God with one eye, rather than
having two eyes to be cast into geenna; 48 where their :worm dieth not, and
the fire is not quenched. 49 For every one shall be salted with fire. 50 :Salt
is good: but if the salt become saltless, wherewith will ye season it? Have
salt in yourselves, and be at peace one with another.

Chapter 10
1 And he arose thence, and cometh into the borders of :Judæa and
beyond the Jordan: and crowds come together unto him again; and, as he
was wont, he taught them again. 2 And Pharisees came to him, and asked
him, if it is lawful for a man to put away his wife? trying him. 3 And he
answered and said to them, What did Moses command you? 4 And they
said, Moses permitted to write a bill of divorce, and to put away.
5 But :Jesus said to them, For your :hardness of heart he wrote you
this :commandment. 6 But from the beginning of creation, Male and female
made he them. 7 For this cause shall a man leave his :father and :mother;
8 and the two shall become one flesh: so that they are no more two, but one
flesh. 9 What therefore :God hath yoked together, let not man put asunder.
10 And in the house the disciples asked him again of this. 11 And he saith to
them, Whosoever shall put away his :wife, and marry another, committeth
adultery against her: 12 and if she herself shall put away her :husband, and
marry another, she committeth adultery.
13 And they were bringing to him little children, that he touch them:
and the disciples rebuked them. 14 But when :Jesus saw it, he was
indignant, and said to them, Suffer the little children to come unto me;
hinder them not: for of such is the kingdom of :God. 15 Amen I say unto you,
Whoso shall not receive the kingdom of :God as a little child, shall in no wise
enter therein. 16 And he took them in his arms, and blessed them, laying
his :hands upon them.
17 And as he was going forth into the way, one ran to him, and
kneeled to him, and asked him, Good Teacher, what shall I do to inherit
eternal life? 18 And :Jesus said to him, Why callest thou me good? none is
good save one, :God. 19 Thou knowest the commandments, Kill not,
Commit no adultery, Steal not, Bear no false witness, Defraud not, Honor
thy :father and :mother. 20 And he said to him, Teacher, all these have I
observed from my youth. 21 And :Jesus looking upon him loved him, and
said to him, One thing thou lackest: go, sell whatsoever thou hast, and give
to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come, follow me.
22 But his countenance fell at the saying, and he went away sorrowful: for
he was one that had great possessions. 23 And :Jesus looked about,
and saith to his :disciples, How hardly shall they that have riches go into the
kingdom of :God! 24 And the disciples were amazed at his :words.
But :Jesus answereth again, and saith to them, Children, how hard is it to
enter into the kingdom of :God! 25 It is easier for a camel to go through a
needle’s eye, than for a rich man to go into the kingdom of :God. 26 And
they were astonished exceedingly, saying unto him, Then who can be
saved? 27 :Jesus looked upon them and saith, Impossible with men, but not
with God: for all things are possible with :God. 28 :Peter began to say to
him, Lo, we have left all, and have followed thee. 29 :Jesus said, Amen I say
unto you, There is no one that hath left house, or brethren, or sisters, or
mother, or father, or children, or fields, for my sake, and for the gospel’s
sake, 30 but he shall receive hundredfold now in this :season houses, and
brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and fields, with
persecutions; and in all the age to :come eternal life. 31 But many first shall
be last; and the last first.
32 And they were on the way, going up to Jerusalem; and :Jesus was
going before them: and they were amazed; and they that followed were
afraid. And he took again the twelve, and began to tell them the things to
happen to him, 33 saying, [that] Lo, we go up to Jerusalem; and the Son
of :man shall be delivered to the chief priests and the scribes; and they shall
condemn him to death, and shall deliver him to the nations: 34 and they shall
mock him, and spit upon him, and scourge him, and kill him; and after three
days he shall rise again.
35 And there come near to him James and John, the two sons of
Zebedee, saying to him, Teacher, we would thou shouldest do for us
whatsoever we shall ask thee. 36 And he said to them, What would ye I
should do for you? 37 And they said to him, Grant us to sit, one on thy right,
and one on thy left, in thy :glory. 38 But :Jesus said to them, Ye know not
what ye ask. Can ye drink the cup that I drink? or to be baptized with the
baptism that I am baptized with? 39 And they said to him, We can.
And :Jesus said to them, The cup that I drink ye shall drink; and with the
baptism that I am baptized with shall ye be baptized: 40 but to sit on my right
or on my left is not mine to give, but for whom it hath been prepared. 41 And
when the ten heard it, they began to be indignant concerning James and
John. 42 And :Jesus called them to him, and saith to them, Ye know that
they who are accounted to rule over the nations lord it over them; and
their :great exercise authority over them. 43 But it is not so among you: but
whosoever would become great among you, shall be your minister; 44 and
whosoever would be first among you, shall be bondman of all. 45 For the
Son of :man also came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give
his :life a ransom for many.
46 And they come to Jericho: and as he went out from Jericho, with
his disciples and a great crowd, the son of Timæus, Bartimæus, a blind
beggar, was sitting by the way side. 47 And when he heard that it was Jesus
the Nazarene, he began to cry out, and say, Jesus, son of David, have
mercy on me. 48 And many rebuked him, that he should hold his peace: but
he cried out the more a great deal, Son of David, have mercy on me.
49 And :Jesus stood still, and said, Call ye him. And they call the blind man,
saying to him, Be of good cheer: rise, he calleth thee. 50 And he, casting
away his :garment, sprang up, and came unto :Jesus. 51 And :Jesus
answered him, and said, What wilt thou that I should do unto thee? And the
blind man said to him, Rabbounei, that I may receive my sight.
52 And :Jesus said to him, Go; thy :faith hath made thee whole. And
straightway he received his sight, and followed him in the way.

Chapter 11
1 And when they draw nigh unto Jerusalem, unto Bethphage and
Bethany, at the mount of :Olives, he sendeth two of his :disciples, 2 and
saith to them, Go into the village that is over against you: and straightway as
ye enter into it, ye shall find a colt tied, whereon no man ever yet sat; loose
him, and bring him. 3 And if any say to you, Why do ye this? say, The Lord
hath need of him; and straightway he sendeth him back hither. 4 And they
went away, and found a colt tied at a door without in the open street; and
they loose him. 5 And certain of them that stood there said to them, What
do ye, loosing the colt? 6 And they said to them even as :Jesus had said:
and they let them go. 7 And they bring the colt unto :Jesus, and cast on him
their :garments; and he sat upon him. 8 And many spread their :garments
upon the way; and others branches, which they had cut from the fields.
9 And who went before and who followed cried,
Hosanna;
Blessed who cometh in the Lord’s name.
10 Blessed the coming kingdom of our :father David:
Hosanna in the highest.
11 And he entered into Jerusalem, into the temple; and having looked round
about upon all things, it being now the eventide hour, he went out to
Bethany with the twelve.
12 And on the morrow, when they came out from Bethany, he
hungered. 13 And seeing a fig tree afar off having leaves, he came, if haply
he might find aught thereon: and when he came to it, he found nothing but
leaves; for it was not the season of figs. 14 And he answered and said to it,
No one eat fruit from thee henceforward unto the age. And his :disciples
heard it. 15 And they come to Jerusalem: and he entered into the
temple, and began to cast out them that sold and them that bought in the
temple, and overthrew the tables of the moneychangers, and the seats of
them that sold the doves; 16 and he would not suffer that any one carry a
vessel through the temple. 17 And he taught, and said, Is it not written, [that]
My :house shall be called a house of prayer for all the nations? but YE have
made it a den of robbers. 18 And the chief priests and the scribes heard it,
and sought how they might destroy him: for they feared him, for all the
crowd was astonished at his :teaching. 19 And every evening they went
forth out of the city. 20 And as they passed by early in the morning, they
saw the fig tree withered away from the roots. 21 And :Peter calling to
remembrance saith to him, Rabbei, behold, the fig tree which thou cursedst
is withered. 22 And :Jesus answered and saith to them, Have God’s faith.
23 Amen I say unto you, [that] Whoso shall say to this mountain, Be taken
up and cast into the sea; and shall not doubt in his :heart, but shall believe
that what he saith cometh to pass, he shall have it. 24 Therefore I say unto
you, All things whatever ye pray and ask for, believe that ye received them,
and ye shall have them. 25 And whensoever ye stand praying, forgive, if ye
have aught against any one; that your :Father also who is in the heavens
may forgive you your :trespasses.
27 And they come again to Jerusalem: and as he was walking in the
temple, the chief priests come unto him, and the scribes, and the elders,
28 and said to him, By what authority doest thou these things? or who gave
thee this :authority to do these? 29 And :Jesus said to them, I will ask you
one question, and answer me, and I will tell you by what authority I do these
things. 30 The baptism of :John, was it from heaven, or from men? answer
me. 31 And they reasoned with themselves, saying, If we shall say, From
heaven; he will say, Why then did ye not believe him? 32 But shall we say,
From men? they feared the crowd: for all verily held :John to be a prophet.
33 And they answered :Jesus and say, We know not. And :Jesus saith to
them, Neither tell I you by what authority I do these things.

Chapter 12
1 And he began to speak to them in parables. A man planted a
vineyard, and set a hedge about it, and digged a winepress pit, and built a
tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into another country. 2 And at
the season he sent to the husbandmen a bondman that he receive from the
husbandmen of the fruits of the vineyard. 3 And they took him, and beat him,
and sent him away empty. 4 And again he sent unto them another
bondman; and him they wounded in the head, and handled shamefully.
5 And he sent another; and him they killed: and many others; beating some,
and killing some. 6 He had yet one, a beloved son: he sent him last unto
them, saying, [that] They will reverence my son. 7 But those :husbandmen
said among themselves [that], This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and the
inheritance shall be ours. 8 And they took and killed him, and cast him forth
out of the vineyard. 9 What will the lord of the vineyard do? he will come and
destroy the husbandmen, and will give to others the vineyard. 10 Have ye
not read even this :scripture:
A stone which the builders rejected,
The same was made head of the corner;
11 This was from the Lord,
And it is marvellous in our eyes?
12 And they sought to seize him; and they feared the crowd, for they
perceived that he spake the parable against them: and they left him, and
went away.
13 And they send unto him certain of the Pharisees and of the
Herodians, that they might catch him in talk. 14 And when they came they
say to him, Teacher, we know that thou art true, and carest for no one; for
thou regardest not the face of men, but of a truth teachest the way of :God:
Is it lawful to give tribute unto Cæsar, or not? 15 Shall we give, or not give?
But he, knowing their :hypocrisy, said to them, Why do ye try me? bring me
a shilling, that I see it. 16 And they brought it. And he saith to them, Whose
this :image and the inscription? And they said to him, Cæsar’s.
17 And :Jesus said, Render to Cæsar the things of Cæsar, and to :God the
things of :God. And they marvelled greatly at him.
18 And Sadducees come unto him, who say, there is no resurrection;
and they asked him, saying, 19 Teacher, Moses wrote unto us, that, If one’s
brother die, and leave a wife behind, and leave no child, that his :brother
should take his :wife, and raise up seed to his :brother. 20 There were
seven brethren: and the first took a wife, and dying left no seed; 21 and the
second took her, and died, leaving no seed behind; and the third likewise:
22 and the seven left no seed. Last of all the woman also died. 23 In the
resurrection whose wife shall she be of them? for the seven had her to wife.
24 :Jesus said to them, Is it not for this cause that ye err, that ye know not
the scriptures, nor the power of :God? 25 For when they shall rise from the
dead, they neither marry, nor are given in marriage; but are as angels in the
heavens. 26 But about the dead, that they are raised; have ye not read in
the book of Moses, in the passage about the Bush, how :God spake to him,
saying, I am the God of Abraham, and God of Isaac, and God of Jacob?
27 He is not God of the dead, but of the living: ye greatly err.
28 And one of the scribes came, and heard them questioning
together, and knowing that he had answered them well, asked him, What
commandment is first of all? 29 :Jesus answered, The first is, Hear, Israel;
The Lord our :God, the Lord is one: 30 and thou shalt love the Lord thy :God
from all thy heart, and from all thy :soul, and from all thy :mind, and from all
thy :strength. 31 And second is this, Thou shalt love thy :neighbor as thyself.
No other commandment is greater than these. 32 The scribe said to him, Of
a truth, Teacher, thou hast well said that his is one; and there is none other
but he: 33 and to love him from all the heart, and from all the understanding,
and from all the strength, and to love his :neighbor as himself, is much more
than all whole :burnt-offerings and sacrifices. 34 And :Jesus seeing that he
answered discreetly, said to him, Thou art not far from the kingdom of :God.
And no one durst question him any more. 35 And :Jesus answered and
said, as he taught in the temple, How say the scribes that the Christ is
David’s son? 36 David himself said in the Holy :Spirit,
The Lord said unto my :Lord,
Sit thou on my right,
Till I put thine :enemies underneath thy :feet.
37 David himself calleth him Lord; and whence is he his son? And the great
crowd heard him gladly. 38 And in :his teaching he said, Beware of the
scribes, who desire to walk in robes, and to have salutations in the markets,
39 and chief seats in the synagogues, and chief places at the feasts: 40 they
that devour :widows’ :houses, and for pretence make long prayers; these
shall receive greater condemnation. 41 And he sat down over against
the treasury, and beheld how the crowd cast brass into the treasury: and
many rich cast in much. 42 And one poor widow came and cast in two mites,
which make a farthing. 43 And he called unto him his :disciples, and said to
them, Amen I say unto you [that] This :poor :widow cast in more than all that
are casting into the treasury:
44 for they all did cast in of their :superfluity; but she of her :want cast in all
that she had, all her :living.

Chapter 13
1 And as he went forth out of the temple, one of his :disciples saith to
him, Teacher, behold, what manner of stones and what manner of buildings!
2 And :Jesus said to him, Seest thou these great :buildings? there shall not
be left here stone upon stone which shall not be thrown down. 3 And as he
sat on the mount of :Olives over against the temple, Peter asked him
privately, and James and John and Andrew: 4 Tell us, when shall these
things be? and what the sign when these are all about to be accomplished?
5 And :Jesus began to say to them, Beware that no one deceive you.
6 Many shall come in my :name, saying [that], I am he; and shall lead many
astray. 7 And when ye shall hear of wars and rumors of wars, be not
troubled: it must come to pass; but the end is not yet. 8 For nation shall rise
against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; earthquakes shall be in
diverse places; famines shall be: these are the beginning of travail. 9 But
look to yourselves: for they shall deliver you up to councils; and in
synagogues shall ye be beaten; and before governors and kings shall ye
stand for my sake, for a witness to them. 10 And the gospel must first be
preached unto all the nations. 11 And when they lead you to judgment, and
deliver you up, be not anxious beforehand what ye shall speak: but
whatever shall be given you in that :hour, that speak; for it is not YE that
speak, but the Holy :Spirit. 12 And brother shall deliver up brother to death,
and a father his child; and children shall rise up against parents, and put
them to death. 13 And ye shall be hated of all for my name’s sake: but who
endureth to the end, the same shall be saved. 14 But when ye see the
abomination of :desolation standing where it ought not (let him that readeth
understand), then let those in :Judæa flee unto the mountains: 15 let him
that is on the housetop not go down, nor enter in, to take anything out of the
house: 16 and let the one in the field not return back to take his cloak. 17 But
woe to those with child and to those giving suck in those :days! 18 And pray
that it be not in winter. 19 For those :days shall be tribulation, such as there
hath not been the like from the beginning of creation which :God created
until :now, and never shall be. 20 And except the Lord had shortened the
days, no flesh would have been saved; but for the elect’s sake, whom he
chose, he shortened the days. 21 And then if any one say to you, See, here
the Christ, see, there, believe not. 22 for false Christs shall arise and false
prophets, and shall show signs and wonders, that they may lead astray, if
possible, the elect. 23 But beware YE: I have told you all things beforehand.
24 But in those :days, after that :tribulation, the sun shall be darkened, and
the moon shall not give her :light, 25 and the stars shall be falling from the
heaven, and the powers :in the heavens shall be shaken. 26 And then shall
they see the Son of :man coming in clouds with great power and glory.
27 And then shall he send forth the angels, and shall gather together
his :elect from the four winds, from earth’s end to heaven’s end. 28 Now
from the fig tree learn the parable: when her :branch is now become tender,
and putteth forth the leaves, ye know that :summer is nigh; 29 even so ye
also, when ye see these things coming to pass, know that he is nigh, at the
doors. 30 Amen I say unto you, that, this :race shall in no wise pass away,
until all these things be accomplished. 31 :Heaven and :earth shall pass
away: but my :words shall not pass away. 32 But of that :day or the hour
knoweth no one, nor the angels in heaven, nor the Son, but the Father.
33 Look out, watch: for ye know not when the season is. 34 It is as when a
man, sojourning in another country, having left his :house, and
given :authority to his :bondmen, to each his :work, commanded also the
porter to watch. 35 Be watchful therefore: for ye know not when the lord of
the house cometh, whether at even, or at midnight, or at cockcrowing, or at
morn; 36 lest coming suddenly he find you sleeping. 37 And what I say to
you I say to all, Watch.

Chapter 14
1 Now after two days was the passover and the unleavened bread:
and the chief priests and the scribes sought how to take him with guile, and
kill him: 2 for they said, Not during the feast, lest haply a tumult shall be of
the people.
3 And while he was in Bethany in the house of Simon the leper, as he
sat at meat, a women came having the alabaster cruse of ointment of pure
nard very costly; she brake the alabaster, and poured it over his :head. 4
But there were some that had indignation among themselves, saying, To
what purpose hath this :waste of the ointment been made? 5 For
this :ointment might have been sold for above three hundred shillings, and
given to the poor. And they murmured against her. 6 But :Jesus said, Let
her alone; why trouble ye her? she hast wrought a good work on me. 7 For
ye have the poor always with you, and whenever ye will ye can do them
always good: but me ye have not always. 8 She hath done what she could;
she hath anointed my :body beforehand for the burying. 9 And amen I say
unto you, Wherever the gospel shall be preached throughout the whole
world, what also this woman hath done shall be spoken of for a memorial of
her. 10 And Judas Iscariot, the one of the twelve, went away unto the
chief priests, that he might deliver him to them. 11 And they, when they
heard it, were glad, and promised to give him silver-pieces. And he sought
how he might conveniently deliver him up.
12 And on the first day of :unleavened bread, when they sacrificed
the passover, his :disciples say to him, Where wilt thou that we go and make
ready that thou eat the passover? 13 And he sendeth two of his :disciples,
and saith to them, Go into the city, and a man shall meet you bearing a
pitcher of water: follow him; 14 and wherever he shall go in, say to the
house-master, The Teacher saith, Where is my :guest-chamber, where I
shall eat the passover with my :disciples? 15 And HE will show you a large
upper room furnished, ready: and there prepare for us. 16 And the disciples
went forth, and came into the city, and found as he had said to them: and
they made ready the passover. 17 And when it was evening he cometh
with the twelve. 18 And as they reclined and were eating, :Jesus said, Amen
I say unto you, [that] One of you shall deliver me up, who eateth with me.
19 They began to be sorrowful, and to say to him one by one, Is it I? 20 And
he said to them, One of the twelve :who dippeth with me in the one dish.
21 Because the Son of :man goeth, even as it is written of him: but woe to
that :man through whom the Son of :man is delivered up! Good were it for
him if that man had not been born. 22 And as they were eating, he took
a loaf, and when he had blessed, he brake it, and gave to them, and said,
Take: this is my :body. 23 And he took a cup, and when he had given thanks,
he gave to them: and all drank of it. 24 And he said to them, This is
my :blood of the covenant, which is shed for many. 25 Amen I say unto you
[that], I shall no more drink of the fruit of the vine, until that :day when I drink
it new in the kingdom of :God. 26 And when they had sung a hymn, they
went out unto the mount of :Olives. 27 And :Jesus saith to them [that] All
ye shall stumble: for it is written, I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep
shall be scattered abroad. 28 But after I am raised up I will go before you
into :Galilee. 29 And Peter said to him, Though all shall stumble, yet not I.
30 And :Jesus saith to him, Amen I say unto thee, that thou today, this :night,
before the cock crow twice, shalt deny me thrice. 31 But he spake
exceeding vehemently, If I must die with thee, I will in nowise deny thee.
Moreover all spake likewise.
32 And they come unto an enclosure by the name of Gethsemane:
and he saith to his :disciples, Sit here, while I pray. 33 And he taketh with
him :Peter and :James and :John, and began to be greatly amazed, and
sore troubled. 34 And he saith to them, My :soul is exceeding sorrowful
even unto death: abide here, and watch. 35 And he went forward a little,
and fell on the ground, and prayed that, if it was possible, the hour might
pass away from him. 36 And he said, Abba, :Father, all things are possible
to thee; remove this :cup from me: but not what I will, but what thou wilt.
37 And he cometh, and findeth them sleeping, and saith to :Peter, Simon,
sleepest thou? couldest thou not watch one hour? 38 Watch and pray, that
ye enter not into temptation: the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.
39 And again he went away, and prayed, saying the same words. 40 And
again he came, and found them sleeping, for their :eyes were very heavy;
and they knew not what to answer him. 41 And he cometh the third time,
and saith to them, Sleep on now, and take your rest: enough; the hour is
come; lo, the Son of :man is delivered up into the hands of :sinners. 42 Arise,
let us be going: lo, he that delivereth me up is at hand. 43 And
straightway, while he yet spake, cometh :Judas, one of the twelve, and with
him a crowd with swords and staves from the chief priests and the scribes
and the elders. 44 Now who delivered him up had given them a token,
saying, Whomever I shall kiss, that is he; take him, and lead him away
safely. 45 And when he was come, straightway he came to him, and saith,
Rabbei, and kissed him much. 46 And they laid :hands on him, and took him.
47 But a certain one of the bystanders drew his :sword, and smote the
bondman of the high priest, and struck off his :ear. 48 And :Jesus answered
and said to them, Are ye come out, as against a robber, with swords and
staves to seize me? 49 I was daily with you in the temple teaching, and ye
took me not: but this is that the scriptures might be fulfilled. 50 And all left
him, and fled. 51 And a certain young man followed with him, having a linen
cloth cast about him, over his naked body: and they lay hold on him; 52 but
he left the linen cloth, and fled naked.
53 And they led :Jesus away unto the high priest: and all the chief
priests and the elders and the scribes come together. 54 And :Peter had
followed him afar off, even within, into the court of the high priest; and he
was sitting with the officers, and warming himself in the light of the fire.
55 Now the chief priests and the whole Sanhedrin were seeking witness
against :Jesus to :put him to death; and found not. 56 For many bare false
witness against him, and their witness agreed not together. 57 And certain
stood up, and bare false witness against him, saying [that] 58 We heard him
say, [that] I will destroy this :temple :made with hands, and in three days I
will build another made without hands. 59 And not even thus did their
witness agree together. 60 And the high priest stood up in the midst, and
asked :Jesus, saying, Answerest thou nothing? what do these witness
against thee? 61 But he was silent, and answered nothing. Again the high
priest asked him, and saith to him, Art thou the Christ, the Son of the
Blessed? 62 And :Jesus said, I am: and ye shall see the Son of :man sitting
at the right hand of the Power, and coming with the clouds of :heaven.
63 And the high priest rent his :clothes, and saith, What further need have
we of witnesses? 64 Ye have heard the blasphemy? what think ye? And
they all condemned him to be worthy of death. 65 And some began to spit
on him, and to cover his :face, and to buffet him, and to say to him,
Prophesy: and the officers received him with blows. 66 And as :Peter
was beneath in the court, there cometh one of the maids of the high priest;
67 and seeing :Peter warming himself, she looked on him, and saith, Thou
also wast with the Nazarene, :Jesus. 68 But he denied, saying, I neither
know, nor understand what thou sayest: and he went out into the fore court.
69 And the maid saw him, and began again to say to the bystanders [that]
This is one of them. 70 But he again denied it. And after a little again the
bystanders said to :Peter, Truly thou are one of them; for thou also are a
Galilæan. 71 But he began to curse, and to swear, [that] I know not
this :man of whom ye speak. 72 And straightway a second time the cock
crew. And :Peter remembered the word, how that :Jesus said to him, [that]
Before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny me thrice. And when he
thought thereon, he wept.

Chapter 15
1 And straightway in the morning the chief priests with the elders and
scribes, and the whole Sanhedrin, held a consultation, and bound :Jesus,
and carried him away, and delivered him up to Pilate. 2 And :Pilate asked
him, Art thou the King of the Jews? And he answering him, saith, Thou
sayest. 3 And the chief priests accused him of many things. 4 And :Pilate
again asked him, saying, Answerest thou nothing? See how many things
they accuse thee of. 5 But :Jesus answered nothing more; so that Pilate
marvelled. 6 Now at the feast he would release to them one prisoner, whom
they asked of him. 7 And the one called Barabbas was bound with the
insurgents, men who in the insurrection had committed murder. 8 And the
crowd went up and began to ask him to do as he was wont to do to them.
9 And :Pilate answered them, saying, Will ye that I release to you the King of
the Jews? 10 For he perceived that for envy the chief priests had delivered
him up. 11 But the chief priests stirred up the crowd, that he should rather
release :Barabbas to them. 12 And Pilate again answered and said to them,
What then shall I do to him whom ye call the King of the Jews? 13 And they
cried out again, Crucify him. 14 And :Pilate said to them, What evil, pray,
hath he done? But they cried out exceedingly, Crucify him. 15 And :Pilate
wishing to content the crowd, released to them :Barabbas, and
delivered :Jesus, when he had scourged him, to be crucified.
16 And the soldiers led him away within the court, which is the
Prætorium; and they call together the whole band. 17 And they clothe him
with purple, and platting a crown of thorns, they put it on him; 18 and they
began to salute him, Hail, King of the Jews! 19 And they smote his :head
with a reed, and spat upon him, and bowing their knees worshipped him.
20 And when they had mocked him, they took off from him the purple, and
put on him his :garments. And they lead him out to crucify him. 21 And they
compel one passing by, Simon of Cyrene, coming from the country, the
father of Alexander and Rufus, that he might bear his :cross. 22 And they
bring him unto the place Golgotha, which is, being interpreted, Place of a
skull. 23 And they gave him wine mingled with myrrh: but he received it not.
24 And they crucify him, and part his :garments among them, casting lots
upon them, what each should take. 25 And it was the third hour, and they
crucified him. 26 And the inscription of his :accusation was written over, THE
KING OF THE JEWS. 27 And with him they crucify two robbers; one on his
right, and one on his left. 29 And the passers by railed on him, wagging their
heads, and saying, Ha! thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in
three days, 30 save thyself, and come down from the cross. 31 Likewise
also the chief priests mocking him among themselves with the scribes said,
He saved others, himself he cannot save. 32 Let the Christ, the King of
Israel, now come down from the cross, that we might see and believe. And
those crucified with him reproached him. 33 And when the sixth hour
was come, darkness came over the whole earth until the ninth hour. 34 And
at the ninth hour :Jesus cried with a loud voice, Eloi, Eloi, lama
sabachthanei? which is, being interpreted, My :God, my :God, why hast
thou forsaken me? 35 And some of the bystanders, when they heard it, said,
See, he calleth Elijah. 36 And one ran, and filling a sponge with vinegar, put
it on a reed, and gave him to drink, saying, Let be; let us see whether Elijah
cometh to take him down. 37 And :Jesus uttered a loud voice, and expired.
38 And the veil of the sanctuary was rent in two from top to bottom. 39 And
when the centurion, who stood by over against him, saw that he thus
expired, he said, Truly this :man was God’s Son. 40 And there were also
women beholding from afar: among whom were both Mariam :Magdalene,
and Mary the mother of James the little and of Joses, and Salōmē; 41 who,
when he was in :Galilee, followed him, and ministered to him; and many
other women that came up with him unto Jerusalem.
42 And when even was now come, since it was the Preparation, that
is, the day before the sabbath, 43 Joseph of Arimathæa came, a councillor
of honorable estate, who also himself was looking for the kingdom of :God;
and he boldly went in unto :Pilate, and asked for the body of :Jesus.
44 And :Pilate marvelled if he were already dead: and calling unto him the
centurion, asked him if he were already dead. 45 And when he learned it of
the centurion, he granted the corpse to :Joseph. 46 And he bought a linen
cloth, and taking him down, wound him in the linen cloth, and laid him in a
tomb which had been hewn out of a rock; and he rolled a stone against the
door of the tomb. 47 And :Mary :Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joses
beheld where he was laid.

Chapter 16
1 And when the sabbath was past, :Mary :Magdalene, and Mary the
mother of :James, and Salōmē brought spices, that they might come and
anoint him. 2 And very early on the first day of the week, they come to the
tomb when the sun was risen. 3 And they were saying among themselves,
Who shall roll us away the stone from the door of the tomb? 4 and looking
up, they behold that the stone is rolled back: for it was exceeding great.
5 And entering into the tomb, they saw a young man sitting on the right,
arrayed in a white robe; and they were amazed. 6 And he saith to them, Be
not amazed: ye seek Jesus, the Nazarene, the crucified one: he is risen; he
is not here: see the place where they laid him! 7 But go, tell his :disciples
and :Peter [that], He goeth before you into :Galilee: there shall ye see him,
as he said to you. 8 And they went out and fled from the tomb; for trembling
and astonishment had come upon them: and they said nothing to any one;
for they were afraid.
9 Now when he was risen early on the first of the week, he appeared
first to Mary :Magdalene, from whom he had cast out seven demons.
10 SHE went and reported to them that had been with him, as they mourned
and wept. 11 And THEY, when they heard that he was alive, and had been
seen of her, disbelieved. 12 And after these things he was manifested in
another form to two of them walking, as they were proceeding into the
country. 13 And THEY went away and reported to the rest: neither believed
they them. 14 And afterward he was manifested to the eleven themselves
as they sat at meat; and he rebuked their :unbelief and hardness of heart,
because they believed not them that had seen him risen from the dead.
15 And he said to them, Go into all the world, and preach the gospel to the
whole creation. 16 Who hath believed and is baptized shall be saved; but
who hath disbelieved shall be condemned. 17 And these signs shall follow
them that have believed: in my :name shall they cast out demons, speak
with tongues; 18 and in their hands they shall take up serpents, and if they
drink aught deadly, it shall in now wise hurt them; they shall lay hands on
the sick, and they shall recover.
19 So then the Lord Jesus, after he had spoken to them, was taken
up into :heaven, and sat down at the right hand of :God. 20 And THEY went
forth, and preached everywhere, the Lord working with them, and
confirming the word by the signs that followed.

ACCORDING TO LUKE

Chapter 1
1 FORASMUCH as many have taken in hand to draw up a narrative
concerning the matters which have been established among us, 2 even as
they delivered them to us, who from the beginning were eyewitnesses and
ministers of the word, 3 it seemed good to me also, having traced the course
of all things accurately from above, to write to thee in order, excellent
Theophilus; 4 that thou mightest know the certainty concerning the words
wherein thou wast instructed.
5 There was in the days of Herod, king of :Judæa, a certain priest,
Zacharias by name, of the course of Abijah: and he had a wife of the
daughters of Aaron, and her :name was Elisabeth. 6 And both were
righteous before :God, walking in all the commandments and ordinances of
the Lord blameless. 7 And they had no child, because that :Elisabeth was
barren, and both were now advanced in their :days. 8 Now it came to
pass, while he ministered as priest before :God in the order of his :course,
9 according to the custom of the priesthood, his lot was to enter into the
sanctuary of the Lord and burn incense. 10 And the whole multitude of the
people was praying without at the hour of :incense. 11 And there appeared
to him an angel of the Lord standing on the right of the altar of :incense.
12 And Zacharias was troubled when he saw him, and fear fell upon him.
13 But the angel said unto him, Fear not, Zacharias: because
thy :supplication is heard, and thy :wife Elisabeth shall bear thee a son, and
thou shalt call his :name John. 14 And thou shalt have joy and gladness;
and many shall rejoice at his :birth. 15 For he shall be great before the Lord,
and shall drink no wine nor strong drink; and shall be filled with the Holy
Spirit, even from his mother’s :womb. 16 And many of the sons of Israel
shall he turn unto the Lord their :God. 17 And HE shall go before his face in
the spirit and power of Elijah, to turn the fathers’ hearts to the children, and
the disobedient to walk in the wisdom of the just; to make ready for the Lord
a people prepared for him. 18 And Zacharias said to the angel, Whereby
shall I know this? for I am an old man, and my :wife advanced in her :days.
19 And the angel answered and said to him, I am Gabriel, that stand
in :God’s presence; and I was sent to speak unto thee, and bring thee these
good tidings. 20 And lo, thou shalt be silent and unable to speak, until the
day that these things shall come to pass, because thou believedst not
my :words, which shall be fulfilled unto their :season. 21 And the people
was waiting for :Zacharias, and marvelled while he tarried in the sanctuary.
22 And when he came out, he could not speak to them: and they perceived
that he had seen a vision in the sanctuary: and HE continued making signs
to them, and remained dumb. 23 And it came to pass, when the days of
his :ministration were fulfilled, he departed unto his :house. 24 And after
these :days Elisabeth his :wife conceived; and she hid herself five months,
saying, [that] 25 Thus hath the Lord done to me in the days wherein he
looked upon me, to take away my reproach among men.
26 Now in the sixth :month the angel Gabriel was sent from :God unto
a city of :Galilee, Nazareth by name, 27 unto a virgin betrothed to a man
Joseph by name of David’s house; and the name of the virgin was Mariam.
28 And he came in unto her, and said, Hail, thou grace-endued, the Lord is
with thee. 29 But she was greatly troubled at the saying, and cast in her
mind what manner of :salutation this might be. 30 And the angel said to her,
Fear not, Mariam: for thou hast found grace with :God. 31 And lo, thou shalt
conceive in thy womb, and bear a Son, and shalt call his :name JESUS.
32 HE shall be great, and shall be called Son of the Most High: and the
Lord :God shall give him the throne of his :father David: 33 and he shall reign
over the house of Jacob unto the ages; and of his :kingdom shall be no end.
34 And Mariam said unto the angel, How shall this be, since I know not a
man? 35 And the angel answered and said to her, The Holy Spirit shall
come upon thee, and the power of the Most High shall overshadow thee:
wherefore also what is begotten shall be called holy, Son of God. 36 And lo,
Elisabeth thy :kinswoman, she also hath conceived a son in her old age;
and this is the sixth month with her that is called barren. 37 Because no
word from :God shall be void of power. 38 And Mariam said, Lo, the
bondmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy :word. And the angel
departed from her. 39 And Mariam arose in these :days and went into
the hill country with haste, into a city of Judah; 40 and entered into the house
of Zacharias and greeted :Elisabeth. 41 And it came to pass,
when :Elisabeth heard the greeting of :Mariam, the babe leaped in
her :womb; and :Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit; 42 and she lifted up
her voice with a loud cry, and said, Blessed thou among women, and
blessed the fruit of thy :womb. 43 And whence is this to me, that the mother
of my :Lord should come unto me? 44 For lo, when the voice of thy :greeting
came into mine :ears, the babe leaped in my :womb for joy. 45 And blessed
she that believed that there shall be a fulfillment of the things spoken to her
from the Lord. 46 And Mariam said,
My :soul doth magnify the Lord,
47 And my :spirit hath rejoiced in :God my :Savior.
48 Because he hath looked upon the low estate of his :bondmaid:
For lo, from :now on all :generations shall call me blessed.
49 Because the Mighty one hath done to me great things;
And holy is his :name.
50 And his :mercy is unto generations and generations
On them that fear him.
51 He hath showed strength with his arm;
He hath scattered the proud in the imagination of their heart.
52 He hath put down princes from thrones,
And exalted the lowly.
53 The hungry he hath filled with good things;
And the rich he hath sent empty away.
54 He hath given help to Israel his servant,
To remember mercy
55 (As he spake unto our :fathers)
To :Abraham and his :seed unto the age.
56 And Mariam abode with her about three months, and returned to
her :house.
57 Now :Elisabeth’s time was fulfilled that she should be delivered;
and she gave birth to a son. 58 And the neighbors and her :kinsfolk heard
that the Lord had magnified his :mercy toward her; and they rejoiced with
her. 59 And it came to pass on the eighth :day, they came to circumcise the
child; and they would have called him Zacharias, after the name of
his :father. 60 And his :mother answered and said, Not so; but he shall be
called John. 61 And they said unto her [that], There is none of thy :kindred
that is called by this :name. 62 And they made signs to his :father, what he
would have him called. 63 And he asked for a writing tablet, and wrote,
saying, His name is John. And all marvelled. 64 And his :mouth was
opened immediately, and his :tongue, and he spake, blessing :God. 65 And
fear came on all that dwelt round about them: and all these :sayings were
noised abroad throughout all the hill country of Judæa. 66 And all that heard
laid them up in their :heart, saying, What then shall this :child be? For the
Lord’s hand was also with him. 67 And his :father Zacharias was filled
with the Holy Spirit, and prophesied, saying,
68 Blessed the Lord, the God of :Israel;
Because he hath visited and wrought redemption for his :people,
69 And hath raised up a horn of salvation for us
In his servant David’s house.
70 (As he spake by the mouth of his holy :prophets from the age),
71 Salvation from our enemies, and from the hand of all that hate us;
72 To show mercy toward our :fathers,
And to remember his holy covenant;
73 The oath which he sware unto Abraham our :father,
74 To :grant unto us that we, delivered out of our enemies’ hand,
Should serve him without fear,
75 In holiness and righteousness before him all our :days.
76 Yea and thou, child, shalt be called prophet of the Most High:
For thou shalt go before the Lord to make ready his ways;
77 To :give knowledge of salvation to his :people
In remission of their sins,
78 Because of the bowels of mercy of our God,
Wherein the dayspring from on high shall visit us,
79 To shine upon them that sit in darkness and the shadow of death;
To guide our :feet into the way of peace.
80 And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, and was in the
deserts till the day of his showing unto :Israel.

Chapter 2
1 Now it came to pass in those :days, a decree went out from Cæsar
Augustus, that all the inhabited earth be enrolled. 2 This was the first
enrolment made when Quirinius was governor of :Syria. 3 And all went to
be enrolled, each to his own :city. 4 And Joseph also went up from :Galilee,
out of the city of Nazareth, into :Judæa, to David’s city, which is called
Bethlehem, because he was of David’s house and family; 5 to enrol himself
with Mariam, who was betrothed to him, being great with child. 6 And it
came to pass, while they were there, the days were fulfilled that she should
be delivered. 7 And she was delivered of her :firstborn :son; and they
swaddled him and laid him in a manger, because there was no room for
them in the inn. 8 And shepherds were in the same :country abiding in
the field, and keeping watch by :night over their :flock. 9 And the Lord’s
angel stood by them, and the Lord’s glory shone about them: and they were
sore afraid. 10 And the angel said to them, Be not afraid; for lo, I bring you
good tidings of great joy which shall be to the whole people: 11 for this day is
born to you in David’s city a Savior, who is Christ the Lord. 12 And this is a
sign for you: Ye shall find a child swaddled, and lying in a manger. 13 And
suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host of those
praising :God, and saying,
14 Glory to God in the highest,
And on earth peace among men of good pleasure.
15 And it came to pass, when the angels went away from them into :heaven,
the shepherds said one to another, Let us now go even unto Bethlehem,
and see this :saying that is come to pass, which the Lord hath made known
to us. 16 And they came with haste, and found both :Mariam and :Joseph,
and the babe lying in the manger. 17 And when they saw it, they made
known concerning the saying which was spoken to them about this :child.
18 And all that heard it wondered at the things spoken unto them by the
shepherds. 19 But Mary kept all these :sayings, pondering them in
her :heart. 20 And the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising :God for
all things that they had heard and seen, even as it was spoken unto them.
21 And when eight days were fulfilled for :circumcising him, his name
also was called JESUS, which was so called by the angel before he
was :conceived in the womb.
22 And when the days of their :purification according to the law of
Moses were fulfilled, they brought him up to Jerusalem, to present him to
the Lord 23 (as it is written in the law of the Lord, [that] Every male that
openeth the womb shall be called holy to the Lord), 24 and to :offer a
sacrifice according to what is said in the law of the Lord, A pair of
turtle-doves, or two young pigeons. 25 And lo, a man was in Jerusalem,
Simeon by name; and this :man was righteous and devout, looking for the
consolation of :Israel: and the Holy Spirit was upon him. 26 And it had been
revealed to him by the Holy :Spirit, that he should not see death, before he
had seen the Christ of the Lord. 27 And he came in the Spirit into the temple:
and when the parents :brought in the child Jesus, to :do concerning him
after the custom of the law, 28 HE also received him into his :arms, and
blessed :God, and said,
29 Now lettest thou thy :bondman depart, Master
According to thy :word, in peace;
30 For mine :eyes have seen thy :salvation,
31 Which thou hast prepared before the face of all :peoples;
32 A light for revelation to the nations,
And the glory of thy people Israel.
33 And his :father was marvelling, and his :mother, at the things spoken
concerning him; 34 and Simeon blessed them, and said unto Mariam
his :mother, Lo, this child is set for the falling and the rising of many in :Israel;
and for a sign spoken against; 35 and a sword shall pierce through thine
own :soul; that thoughts out of many hearts be revealed. 36 And there
was Anna, a prophetess, daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Asher (SHE
was of great age, having lived with a husband seven years from
her :virginity, 37 and SHE a widow even unto eighty-four years), who
departed not from the temple, worshipping with fastings and supplications
night and day. 38 And coming up at that very hour she gave thanks to :God,
and spake of him to all that were looking for the redemption of Jerusalem.
39 And when they had accomplished all the things according to the
law of the Lord, they returned to :Galilee, to their own city Nazaret.
40 And the child grew, and waxed strong, filled with wisdom: and
God’s grace was upon him.
41 And his :parents went every year to Jerusalem at the feast of the
passover. 42 And when he was twelve years old, they went up after the
custom of the feast; 43 and when they had fulfilled the days, as they
were :returning, the boy Jesus tarried behind in Jerusalem; and his :parents
knew it not; 44 but supposing him to be in the company, they went a day’s
journey, and sought for him among their :kinsfolk and :acquaintances;
45 and not finding him, they returned to Jerusalem, seeking for him. 46 And
it came to pass, after three days they found him in the temple, sitting in the
midst of the teachers, both hearing them, and asking them questions:
47 and all that heard him were amazed at his :understanding and
his :answers. 48 And when they saw him, they were astonished; and
his :mother said unto him, Child, why hast thou thus dealt with us? lo, thy
father and I seek thee sorrowing. 49 And he said unto them, How is it that ye
sought me? knew ye not that I must be about my :Father’s business. 50 And
THEY understood not the saying which he spake to them. 51 And he went
down with them, and came to Nazaret; and was subject to them: and
his :mother kept all the sayings in her :heart. 52 And Jesus advanced
in :wisdom and stature, and in grace with God and men.

Chapter 3
1 Now in the fifteenth year of the government of Tiberius Cæsar,
Pontius Pilate being governor of :Judæa, and Herod being tetrarch
of :Galilee, and his :brother Philip tetrarch of the region of :Ituræa and
Trachonitis, and Lysanias tetrarch of :Abeilēnē, 2 in the time of high priest
Annas and Caiaphas, the word of God came unto John the son of Zacharias
in the wilderness. 3 And he came into all the region round about the Jordan,
preaching a baptism of repentance unto remission of sins; 4 as it is written in
the book of Isaiah the prophet’s words,
A voice of one crying in the wilderness,
Prepare the way of the Lord,
Make his :paths straight.
5 Every valley shall be filled,
And every mountain and hill shall be brought low;
And the crooked shall become straight,
And the rough ways smooth;
6 And all flesh shall see the salvation of :God.
7 He said therefore to the crowds that went out to be baptized of him,
Offspring of vipers, who warned you to flee from the wrath to come? 8 Bring
forth therefore fruits worthy of :repentance, and begin not to say within
yourselves, We have :Abraham for our father: for I say unto you, that :God
can of these :stones raise up children to :Abraham. 9 And even now the axe
lieth at the root of the trees: every tree therefore that bringeth not forth good
fruit is cut down, and cast into the fire. 10 And the crowds asked him, saying,
What shall we do? 11 And he answered and said to them, Who hath two
coats, let him impart to him that hath none; and who hath food, let him do
likewise. 12 And publicans also came to be baptized, and said unto him,
Teacher, what shall we do? 13 And he said unto them, Exact no more than
what is appointed you. 14 And soldiers also asked him, saying, And what
are WE to do? And he said to them, Extort from none, neither accuse
wrongfully; and be content with your :wages. 15 And as the people was
in expectation, and all were reasoning in their :hearts about :John, whether
haply HE were the Christ; 16 John answered, saying to all, I indeed baptize
you with water; but the one mightier than I cometh the latchet of
whose :shoes I am not fit to unloose: HE shall baptize you in the Holy Spirit
and fire: 17 whose :fan is in his :hand, thoroughly to cleanse
his :threshing-floor, and to gather the grain into his :barn; but the chaff he
will burn up with unquenchable fire. 18 With many other exhortations
therefore preached he good tidings to the people; 19 but :Herod the tetrarch,
being reproved by him for Herodias the wife of his :brother, and for all the
evils which :Herod had done, 20 added this also to them all: he shut
up :John in prison.
21 Now it came to pass, when the whole people was :baptized, that
Jesus also having been baptized, and praying, the heaven was opened,
22 and the Holy :Spirit descended in bodily form, as a dove, upon him, and a
voice came out of heaven, Thou art my :Son the beloved; in thee I am well
pleased. 23 And Jesus himself, when he began, was about thirty years
old, being the son (as was supposed) of Joseph, of :Hēlei, 24 of :Matthat,
of :Levi, of :Melchei, of :Jannai, of :Joseph, 25 of :Mattathias, of :Amos,
of :Nahum, of :Eslei, of :Naggai, 26 of :Maath, of :Mattathias, of :Semeein,
of :Jōsēch, of :Jōda, 27 of :Jōanan, of :Rhēsa, of :Zorobabel, of :Salathiēl, of
Nērei, 28 of :Melchei, of :Addei, of :Cōsam, of :Elmadam, of :Ēr, 29 of :Jesus,
of :Eliezer, of :Jōreim, of :Maththat, of :Levi, 30 of :Symeon, of :Judah,
of :Joseph, of :Jōnam, of :Eliakeim, 31 of :Melea, of :Menna, of :Mattatha,
of :Natham, of :David, 32 of :Jessai, of :Iōbēd, of :Boos, of :Sala,
of :Naassōn, 33 of :Admein, of :Arnei, of :Hezrōn, of :Phares, of :Judah,
34 of :Jacob, of :Isaac, of :Abraham, of :Thara, of :Nachōr, 35 of :Seruch,
of :Ragau, of :Phalek, of :Eber, of :Sala, 36 of :Cainam, of :Arphaxad,
of :Shēm, of :Noah, of :Lamech, 37 of :Mathusalah, of :Enōch, of :Jaret,
of :Maleleēl, of :Cainam, 38 of :Enōs, of :Sēth, of :Adam, of :God.

Chapter 4
1 And Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan, and was
led in the Spirit in the wilderness 2 forty days, being tempted of the devil.
And he ate nothing in those :days: and when they were completed, he
hungered. 3 And the devil said to him, If thou art :God’s Son, say to this
stone that it become bread. 4 And :Jesus answered unto him, It is written
[that] :Man shall not live by bread alone. 5 And he led him up, and showed
him all the kingdoms of the inhabited earth in a moment of time. 6 And the
devil said to him, To thee will I give the whole of this :authority, and the glory
of them, because it hath been delivered to me; and to whomsoever I will, I
give it. 7 If thou therefore wilt worship before me, it shall all be thine.
8 And :Jesus answered and said to him, It is written, Thou shalt worship the
Lord thy God, and him alone shalt thou serve. 9 And he led him to
Jerusalem, and set him on the wing of the temple, and said to him, If thou
art :God’s Son, cast thyself down hence: 10 for it is written [that],
He shall give his :angels charge concerning thee, to guard thee:
11 and [that],
On their hands they shall bear thee up,
Lest haply thou dash thy :foot against a stone.
12 And :Jesus answered and said to him [that], It is said, Thou shalt not
make trial of the Lord thy :God. 13 And when the devil had completed every
temptation, he departed from him until a season.
14 And :Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into :Galilee: and a
fame went out concerning him through the whole region round about.
15 And HE was teaching in their :synagogues, being glorified of all.
16 And he came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up: and he
entered, as his :custom was, into the synagogue on the day of the sabbaths
and stood up to read. 17 And he was handed the scroll of the prophet Isaiah.
And he opened the scroll, and found the place where it was written,
18 The Lord’s Spirit is upon me,
Because he anointed me to preach good tidings to the poor;
Hath sent me to proclaim release to captives, and sight to the blind,
To set free the bruised,
19 To proclaim the Lord’s acceptable year.
20 And he rolled up the scroll, and gave it back to the attendant, and sat
down: and the eyes of all in the synagogue were fastened on him. 21 And
he began to say unto them [that], Today hath this :scripture been fulfilled in
your :ears. 22 And all bare him witness, and wondered at the words
of :grace :proceeding out of his :mouth: and they said, Is not this Joseph’s
son? 23 And he said unto them, Doubtless ye will say to me this :parable,
Healer, cure thyself: whatever we have heard taking place at Capernaum,
do also here in thine own :country. 24 And he said, Amen I say unto you that
no prophet is acceptable in his own :country. 25 But of a truth I say unto you,
Many widows were in :Israel in the days of Elijah, when the heaven was
shut up three years and six months, as a great famine came over all the
land; 26 and unto none of them was Elijah sent, but only to Sarepta, in the
land of Sidon, unto a woman, a widow. 27 And many lepers were in :Israel
in the time of Elisha the prophet; and none of them was cleansed, but only
Naiman the Syrian. 28 And all in the synagogue were filled with wrath, as
they heard these things; 29 and they rose up, and cast him forth out of the
city, and led him unto the brow of the hill whereon their :city was built, that
they might throw him down headlong. 30 But HE passing through the midst
of them went his way.
31 And he came down to Capernaum, a city of :Galilee. And he was
teaching them on the sabbaths: 32 and they were astonished at
his :teaching; because his :word was with authority. 33 And in the
synagogue was a man, having a spirit of an unclean demon; and he cried
out with a loud voice, 34 Ah! what have we to do with thee, Jesus Nazarene?
camest thou to destroy us? I know thee who thou art, the Holy One of :God.
35 And :Jesus rebuked him, saying, Be silent, and come out of him. And the
demon threw him down in the midst, and came out of him, having done him
no hurt. 36 And amazement came upon all, and they spake together, one
with another, saying, What is this :word, that with authority and power he
commandeth the unclean spirits, and they come out? 37 And a rumor
concerning him went forth into every place of the region round about.
38 And he rose up from the synagogue, and entered into the house of Simon.
And :Simon’s mother-in-law was holden with a great fever; and they
besought him for her. 39 And he stood over her, and rebuked the fever; and
it left her: and immediately she rose and ministered to them. 40 And
when the sun was setting, all that had any weak with diverse sicknesses
brought them unto him; and HE laid :hands on every one of them, and cured
them. 41 And demons also came out from many, crying out, and saying
[that] Thou art the Son of :God. And rebuking them, he suffered them not to
speak, because they knew he was the Christ. 42 And when it was day,
he came out and went into a desert place: and the crowds sought after him,
and came unto him, and would have stayed him, that he go not from them.
43 But he said unto them [that], I must preach the good tidings of the
kingdom of :God to the other cities also: because for this I was sent.
44 And he was preaching in the synagogues of :Judæa.

Chapter 5
1 Now it came to pass, while the crowd pressed upon him and heard
the word of :God, that HE also was standing by the lake of Gennesaret;
2 and he saw two boats standing by the lake: but the fishermen had gone
out of them, and were washing their nets. 3 And he entered into one of the
boats, which was Simon’s, and asked him to put out a little from the land.
And he sat down and taught the crowds out of the boat. 4 And when he had
ceased speaking, he said unto :Simon, Put out into the deep, and let down
your :nets for a catch. 5 And Simon answered and said, Master, we toiled
all night, and took nothing: but at thy :word I will let down the nets. 6 And
having done this, they inclosed a great multitude of fishes; and their :nets
were breaking; 7 and they beckoned to their partners in the other boat, to
come and help them. And they came, and filled both the boats, so that they
began to sink. 8 But Simon Peter, seeing it, fell down at the knees of Jesus,
saying, Depart from me; for I am a sinful man, Lord. 9 For he was amazed,
and all that were with him, at the catch of the fishes which they had taken;
10 and so were also James and John, sons of Zebedee, who were
associates with :Simon. And Jesus said unto :Simon, Fear not; from :now
on thou shalt catch men. 11 And when they had brought the boats to :land,
they left all, and followed him.
12 And it came to pass, while he was in one of the cities, [and] lo: a
man full of leprosy: and seeing :Jesus, he fell on his face, and besought him,
saying, Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst cleanse me. 13 And he stretched forth
his :hand, and touched him, saying, I will; be cleansed. And straightway the
leprosy departed from him. 14 And HE charged him to tell no one: but go,
and show thyself to the priest, and offer for thy :cleansing, according as
Moses commanded, for a witness to them. 15 But all the more went abroad
the word concerning him: and great crowds came together to hear, and to
be cured of their :infirmities. 16 But HE was withdrawing in the deserts, and
praying.
17 And it came to pass on one of the days, he himself was [also]
teaching; and Pharisees and doctors of the law were sitting by, who were
come out of every village :of Galilee and Judæa and Jerusalem: and the
Lord’s power was with him to heal. 18 And lo, men bring on a bed a man
that was paralyzed: and they sought to bring him in, and lay him before him.
19 And not finding by what way they might bring him in because of the crowd,
they went up to the housetop, and let him down through the tiles with the
couch into the midst before :Jesus. 20 And seeing their :faith, he said, Man,
thy :sins are forgiven thee. 21 And the scribes and the Pharisees began to
reason, saying, Who is this that speaketh blasphemies? Who can forgive
sins, but :God alone? 22 But :Jesus perceiving their reasonings, answered
and said unto them, What reason ye in your :hearts? 23 What is easier, to
say, Thy :sins are forgiven thee; or to say, Arise and walk? 24 But that ye
may know that the Son of :man hath authority on :earth to forgive sins (he
said to the paralyzed one), I say unto thee, Arise, and take up thy couch,
and go unto thy :house. 25 And immediately he rose before them, and took
up what he lay on, and departed to his :house, glorifying :God. 26 And
amazement took hold on all, and they glorified :God; and they were filled
with fear, saying [that], We have seen strange things today.
27 And after these things he went forth, and beheld a publican, Levi
by name, sitting at the place of toll, and said to him, Follow me. 28 And he
forsook all, and rose up and followed him. 29 And Levi made him a great
feast in his :house: and there was a great crowd of publicans and of others
that were sitting at meat with them. 30 And the Pharisees and their :scribes
murmured saying unto the disciples, Why do ye eat and drink with the
publicans and sinners? 31 And :Jesus answering said unto them, The
healthy have no need of a physician; but the ailing. 32 I am not come to call
the righteous but sinners to repentance. 33 And they said unto him, The
disciples of John fast often, and make supplications; likewise also those of
the Pharisees; but :thine eat and drink. 34 And :Jesus said unto them, Can
ye make the sons of the bridechamber fast, while the bridegroom is with
them? 35 But the days will come, [and] when the bridegroom shall be taken
away from them, then will they fast in those :days. 36 And he spake also a
parable unto them [that], No one rendeth for a patch from a new garment
and patches it upon an old garment; else he will also rend the new, and the
patch :from the new will not agree with the old. 37 And no one poureth new
wine into old wine-skins; else the new :wine will burst the skins, and itself
will be spilled, and the skins will perish. 38 But new wine must be poured
into fresh wine-skins. 39 No one drinking old wine desireth new; for he saith,
The old is good.

Chapter 6
1 Now it came to pass that he was on a sabbath going through
grainfields; and his :disciples were plucking the ears, and eating, rubbing
them in their hands. 2 But certain of the Pharisees said, Why do ye what is
not lawful on the sabbath[s]? 3 And :Jesus answered and said unto them,
Have ye not read even this, what David did, when himself hungered, and
those with him; 4 how he entered into the house of :God, and took and ate
the show-loaves, and gave to those with him; which it is not lawful to eat
save for the priests alone? 5 And he said to them, The Son of :man is lord of
the sabbath also. 6 And it came to pass on another sabbath, that he
entered into the synagogue and taught: and a man was there, and
his :right :hand was withered. 7 And the scribes and the Pharisees were
watching him, whether he would cure on the sabbath; that they might find
how to accuse him. 8 But HE knew their :reasonings, and said to the man
that had his :hand withered, Rise, and stand forth in the midst. And he arose
and stood forth. 9 And :Jesus said unto them, I ask you whether it is lawful
on the sabbath to do good, or to do evil? to save life, or to destroy it? 10 And
he looked about on them all, and said to him, Stretch forth thy :hand. And he
did: and his :hand was restored. 11 But THEY were filled with madness; and
were discussing with one another what they might do to :Jesus.
12 And it came to pass in these :days, that he went out into the
mountain to pray; and he continued all night in :prayer to :God. 13 And
when it was day, he called his :disciples; and chose from them twelve,
whom he also named apostles: 14 Simon, whom he also named Peter, and
Andrew his :brother, and James and John, and Philip and Bartholomew, 15
and Matthew and Thomas, and James son of Alphæus, and Simon the one
called Zealot, 16 and Judas son of James, and Judas Iscarioth, who
became a traitor; 17 and he came down with them, and stood on a level
place, and a great crowd of his disciples, and a great multitude of the people
from all :Judæa and Jerusalem, and the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon, who
came to hear him, and to be healed of their :sicknesses; 18 and those
oppressed by unclean spirits were cured. 19 And the whole crowd were
seeking to touch him, for power came forth from him, and healed all.
20 And HE lifted up his :eyes on his :disciples, and said,
Blessed ye :poor: for yours is the kingdom of :God.
21 Blessed ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled.
Blessed ye that weep now: for ye shall laugh.
22 Blessed are ye, when :men shall hate you, and when they shall
ostracise you and reproach, and cast out your :name as evil, for the Son
of :man’s sake. 23 Rejoice in that :day, and leap: for lo, your reward is great
in :heaven; for in the same manner did their :fathers to the prophets.
24 But woe unto you the rich! for ye have your full consolation.
25 Woe unto you that are full now! for ye shall hunger.
Woe, ye that laugh now! for ye shall mourn and weep.
26 Woe, when all :men shall speak well of you! for in the same
manner did their :fathers to the false prophets.
27 But I say unto you that hear, Love your :enemies, do good to those hating
you, 28 bless those cursing you, pray for those reviling you. 29 To the one
smiting thee on the cheek offer also the other; and from the one taking away
thy :cloak withhold not thy :coat also. 30 Give to every one that asketh thee;
and of him that taketh away :thy goods ask not again. 31 And as ye would
that :men should do to you, do to them likewise. 32 And if ye love them that
love you, what thank have ye? for even the sinners love those that love
them. 33 For even if ye do good to them that do good to you, what thank
have ye? even the sinners do the same. 34 And if ye lend to them of whom
ye hope to receive, what thank have ye? even sinners lend to sinners, to
receive the like again. 35 But love your :enemies, and do good, and lend,
never despairing; and your :reward shall be great, and ye shall be sons of
the Most High: for HE is kind toward the unthankful and evil. 36 Be merciful,
even as your :Father is merciful. 37 And judge not, and ye shall in nowise be
judged: and condemn not, and ye shall in nowise be condemned: release,
and ye shall be released: 38 give, and it shall be given to you; good measure,
pressed down, shaken together, running over, shall they give into
your :bosom. For with what measure ye measure it shall be measured to
you again. 39 And he spake also a parable to them, Can the blind guide
the blind? shall not both fall into a pit? 40 A disciple is not above the teacher:
but every one perfected shall be as his :teacher. 41 And why beholdest thou
the mote :in the eye of thy :brother, but considerest not the beam that is in
thine own :eye? 42 How canst thou say to thy :brother, Brother, let me cast
out the mote that is in thine :eye, when thyself beholdest not the beam that
is in thine own :eye? Hypocrite, cast out first the beam out of thine :eye, and
then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote that is in the eye of
thy :brother. 43 For there is no good tree that bringeth forth corrupt fruit; nor
again a corrupt tree that bringeth forth good fruit. 44 For each tree is known
by its own :fruit. For of thorns they gather no figs, nor of a bramble bush
pick they grapes. 45 The good man out of the good treasure of the heart
bringeth forth the good; and the evil man out of the evil treasure bringeth
forth the evil: for out of the abundance of the heart his :mouth speaketh.
46 And why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?
47 Every one :coming unto me, and hearing my :words, and doing them, I
will show you whom he is like: 48 he is like a man building a house, who dug
and went deep, and laid a foundation upon the rock: and when a flood arose,
the river brake against that :house, and could not shake it: because it had
been well builded. 49 But who heard, and did not, is like a man that built a
house upon the earth without a foundation; against which the river brake,
and straightway it fell in; and the ruin of that :house was great.

Chapter 7
1 After he had ended all his :sayings in the ears of the people, he
entered into Capernaum.
2 And a certain centurion’s bondman who was dear to him, was ill
and at the point of death. 3 And when he heard concerning :Jesus, he sent
unto him elders of the Jews, asking him that he come and save
his :bondman. 4 And they, when they came unto :Jesus, besought him
earnestly, saying, [that] He is worthy that thou shouldest do this for him; 5
for he loveth our :nation, and himself built us the synagogue. 6 And :Jesus
went with them. And when he was now not far from the house, the
centurion sent friends to him, saying to him, Lord, trouble not thyself; for I
am not fit that thou shouldest come under my :roof: 7 wherefore neither
thought I myself worthy to come unto thee: but say [with] a word, and
my :boy shall be healed. 8 For I also am a man set under authority, having
under myself soldiers: and I say to this one, Go, and he goeth; and to
another, Come, and he cometh; and to my :bondman, Do this, and he doeth.
9 And when :Jesus heard these things, he marvelled at him, and turned and
said to the crowd following him, I say unto you, I have found so great faith
not even in :Israel. 10 And they that were sent, on returning to the house,
found the bondman whole. 11 And it came to pass soon afterwards, that
he went to a city called Nain; and his :disciples went with him, and a great
crowd. 12 Now when he drew near to the gate of the city, [and] lo, one dead
was carried out, an only son of his :mother, and she was a widow: and a
large crowd of the city was with her. 13 And the Lord seeing her, pitied her,
and said to her, Weep not. 14 And he came nigh and touched the bier: and
the bearers stopped. And he said, Young man, I say unto thee, Arise.
15 And the one dead sat up, and began to speak. And he gave him to
his :mother. 16 And fear took hold on all: and they glorified :God, saying
[that], A great prophet is arisen among us: and [that] :God hath visited
his :people. 17 And this :word went forth concerning him in the whole of
Judæa, and all the region round about.
18 And his :disciples reported to John of all these things.
19 And :John called to him certain two of his :disciples and sent them to
the Lord, saying, Art thou who cometh, or look we for another? 20 And
having come unto him the men said, John the Baptist hath sent us unto thee,
saying, Art thou who cometh, or look we for another? 21 In that :hour he
cured many of sicknesses and scourges and evil spirits; and on many blind
he bestowed sight. 22 And he answered and said to them, Go and report to
John what things ye have seen and heard; the blind look up, the lame walk,
lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised, the poor have
good tidings preached to them. 23 And blessed is he, whoever shall not be
stumbled in me. 24 And when the messengers of John were departed,
he began to say unto the crowds concerning John, What went ye out into
the wilderness to behold? a reed shaken by a wind? 25 But what went ye
out to see? a man clothed in soft garments? Lo, the gorgeously apparelled
and delicately living are in the courts of kings. 26 But what went ye out to
see? a prophet? Yea, I say unto you, and much more than a prophet.
27 This is he of whom it is written,
Lo, I send my :messenger before thy face,
Who shall prepare thy :way before thee.
28 I say unto you, Among them born of women none is greater than John:
yet the lesser in the kingdom of :God is greater than he.—29 And all the
people when they heard, and the publicans, justified :God, having been
baptized with the baptism of John. 30 But the Pharisees and the lawyers
rejected for themselves the counsel of :God, not having been baptized of
him.—31 Whereunto then shall I liken the men of this :generation, and
whereunto are they like? 32 They are like the little children sitting in the
market and calling one to another; who say, We piped to you, and ye
danced not; we wailed, and ye wept not. 33 For John the Baptist is come
eating no bread nor drinking wine; and ye say, He hath a demon. 34 The
Son of :man is come eating and drinking; and ye say, Lo, gluttonous man,
and winebibber, friend of publicans and sinners! 35 And justified is :wisdom
of all her :children.
36 And a certain one of the Pharisees asked him that he eat with him.
And he entered into the house of the Pharisee, and sat down to meat. 37
And lo, a woman who was in the city, a sinner; and when she knew that he
was sitting at meat in the house of the Pharisee, she brought an alabaster
cruse of ointment, 38 and standing behind at his :feet, weeping, began to
wet his :feet with her :tears, and wiped them with the hair of her :head, and
kissed his :feet much, and anointed them with the ointment. 39 Now seeing
it, the Pharisee who had bidden him spake within himself, saying, This man,
if he were the prophet, would have perceived who and what manner
of :woman this is that toucheth him, that she is a sinner. 40 And :Jesus
answered and said unto him, Simon, I have somewhat to say to thee. And
he saith, Teacher, say on. 41 A certain lender had two debtors: the one
owed five hundred shillings, and the other fifty. 42 They not having
wherewith to pay, he forgave them both. Which of them therefore will love
him most? 43 Simon answered and said, He, I suppose, to whom he
forgave the more. And he said to him, Thou hast rightly judged. 44 And
turning unto the woman, he said to :Simon, Seest thou this :woman? I
entered into thy :house, thou gavest me no water for my feet: but SHE hath
wetted my :feet with her :tears, and wiped with her :hair. 45 Thou gavest me
no kiss: but SHE, since the time I came in, hath not ceased to kiss much
my :feet. 46 My :head with oil thou didst not anoint: but SHE hath anointed
my :feet with ointment. 47 Wherefore I say unto thee, Forgiven are her sins,
the many; for she loved much: but to whom little is forgiven, he loveth little.
48 And he said to her, Forgiven are thy :sins. 49 And the fellow-guests
began to say within themselves, Who is this that even forgiveth sins?
50 And he said unto the woman, Thy :faith hath saved thee; go unto peace.

Chapter 8
1 And it came to pass soon afterwards HE [also] went about through
city and village, preaching and bringing the gospel of the kingdom of :God,
and with him the twelve, 2 and certain women who had been cured of evil
spirits and infirmities: Mary the one called Magdalene, from whom seven
demons had gone out, 3 and Jōanna wife of Chuzas Herod’s steward, and
Susanna, and many others, who were ministering to them of
their :substance. 4 And when a great crowd came together, and they of
every city resorted unto him, he spake by a parable: 5 The sower went forth
to sow his :seed: and as he :sowed, some fell by the way side, and was
trodden under, and the birds of the heaven devoured it. 6 And other fell on
the rock; and growing it withered away, because it :had no moisture. 7 And
other fell amidst the thorns; and the thorns grew with it, and choked it. 8 And
other fell into the good :ground, and grew, and brought forth fruit
hundredfold. As he said these things, he cried, Who hath ears to hear, let
him hear. 9 And his :disciples asked him what this :parable might be. 10
And he said, To you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of :God:
but to the rest in parables; that seeing they may not see, and hearing they
may not understand. 11 Now the parable is this: The seed is the word
of :God. 12 And those by the way side are they that have heard; then
cometh the devil, and taketh away the word from their :heart, that they be
not saved by believing. 13 And those on the rock are they who, when they
have heard, receive the word with joy; and these have no root, who for a
season believe, and in the season of temptation fall away. 14 And what fell
among the thorns, these are they that have heard, and while going on are
choked with cares and riches and pleasures of this :life, and bring no perfect
fruit. 15 And that in the good ground, these are such as in an honest and
good heart, having heard the word, hold it fast, and bring forth fruit with
patience. 16 And no one when he hath lighted a lamp, covereth it with
a vessel, or putteth under a bed; but putteth on a stand, that those entering
in may see the light. 17 For nothing is hid, that shall not be made manifest;
nor secret, that shall not be known and come to light. 18 Look out, therefore,
how ye hear: for whoso hath, to him shall be given; and whoso hath not,
from him shall be taken away even what he thinketh he hath.
19 And his :mother came unto him and :brethren, and could not come
at him for the crowd. 20 And it was reported to him, Thy :mother and
thy :brethren stand without, wishing to see thee. 21 But he answered and
said unto them, My mother and my brethren are these that hear the word
of :God, and do it.
22 Now it came to pass on one of the days, both HE entered into a
boat, and his disciples; and he said unto them, Let us go over to the other
side of the lake: and they launched forth. 23 But as they were sailing he fell
asleep: and a storm of wind came down on the lake; and they were filling
with water, and were in danger. 24 And they came to him, and awoke him,
saying, Master, master, we perish. And he awoke, and rebuked the wind
and the raging of the water: and they ceased, and there was a calm. 25 And
he said to them, Where is your :faith? And being afraid they marvelled,
saying one to another, Who then is this, that he commandeth even the
winds and the water, and they obey him? 26 And they sailed down to
the country of the Gerasenes, which is over against :Galilee. 27 And when
he was come forth upon the land, a certain man out of the city met him, who
had demons; and for a long time he had worn no clothes, and abode not in
any house, but in the tombs. 28 And seeing :Jesus, he cried out, and fell
down before him, and with a loud voice said, What have I to do with thee,
Jesus, Son of the Most High :God? I beseech thee, torment me not. 29 For
he was commanding the unclean :spirit to come out from the man. For
many times it had seized him: and he was kept under guard, and bound with
chains and fetters; and breaking the bands asunder, was driven of the
demon into the deserts. 30 And :Jesus asked him, What is thy name? And
he said, Legion; because many demons were entered into him. 31 And they
were entreating him that he would not command them to depart into the
abyss. 32 Now a herd of many swine was there, feeding on the mountain:
and they entreated him that he would permit them to enter into those. And
he permitted them. 33 And the demons came out from the man, and
entered into the swine: and the herd rushed down the steep into the lake,
and were drowned. 34 And they that fed them saw what had come to pass,
and fled, and reported to the city and to the country. 35 And they went out to
see what had come to pass; and they came to :Jesus, and found the man,
from whom the demons were gone out, sitting, clothed and in his right mind,
at the feet of :Jesus: and they were afraid. 36 And who saw it reported to
them how the demoniac was delivered. 37 And the whole multitude of the
country of the Gerasenes round about asked him to depart from them; for
they were holden with great fear: and HE entered into a boat, and returned.
38 But the man from whom the demons were gone out prayed him that he
be with him: but he sent him away, saying, 39 Return to thy :house, and
declare how great things :God hath done for thee. And he went away,
publishing throughout the whole city how great things :Jesus had done for
him.
40 And as :Jesus :returned, the crowd welcomed him; for all were
waiting for him. 41 And lo, a man came, Jairus by name, and this man was
ruler of the synagogue: and he fell down at Jesus’ feet, and besought him to
come into his :house; 42 because he had an only begotten daughter, about
twelve years old, and SHE was dying. But as he :went the crowds thronged
him. 43 And a woman having an issue of blood twelve years, who could be
cured by no one, 44 came on behind, and touched the border of
his :garment: and immediately the issue of her :blood stanched.
45 And :Jesus said, Who is it that touched me? And when all denied, :Peter
said, Master, the crowds press thee and squeeze thee. 46 But :Jesus said,
Some one did touch me; for I perceived that power had gone forth from me.
47 And the woman, seeing that she was not hid, came trembling, and falling
down before him reported in the presence of all the people for what cause
she touched him, and how she was healed immediately. 48 And he said to
her, Daughter, thy :faith hath delivered thee; go unto peace. 49 While he yet
spake, a certain one cometh from the synagogue-ruler’s house saying [that],
Thy daughter is dead: trouble the Teacher no longer. 50 But :Jesus on
hearing it, answered him, Fear not: only believe, and she shall be delivered.
51 And coming to the house he suffered no one to enter with him, save Peter,
and John, and James, and the father of the child and the mother. 52 And all
were weeping, and bewailing her: but he said, Weep not; for she is not dead,
but sleeping. 53 And they laughed at him, knowing that she was dead.
54 But HE, taking her by the hand, called, saying, :Child, arise. 55 And
her :spirit returned, and she rose immediately: and he commanded that
something be given her to eat. 56 And her :parents were amazed: but he
charged them to tell no one what had been done.

Chapter 9
1 And he called the twelve together, and gave them power and
authority over all demons, and to cure sicknesses. 2 And he sent them forth
to preach the kingdom of :God, and to heal. 3 And he said unto them, Take
nothing for the journey, neither staff, nor wallet, nor bread, nor silver; neither
have two coats. 4 And into whatever house ye enter, there abide, and
thence go out. 5 And as many as receive you not, when ye go out from
that :city, shake off the dust from your :feet for a witness against them.
6 And they went out, and went throughout the villages, preaching the gospel,
and healing everywhere. 7 Now Herod the tetrarch heard of all that was
done: and he was perplexed, because it was :said by some, that John was
risen from the dead; 8 and by some, that Elijah had appeared; and by others,
that one of the old prophets was risen. 9 And :Herod said, John I beheaded:
but who is this about whom I hear such things? And he was seeking to see
him. 10 And the apostles, when they were returned, declared to him
what things they had done. And he took them, and withdrew apart to a city
called Bethsaida. 11 But the crowds perceiving it followed him: and he
welcomed them, and spake to them of the kingdom of :God, and them that
had need of a cure he healed. 12 And the day began to decline; and the
twelve came, and said to him, Send the crowd away, that they go into the
villages and country round about, and lodge, and find provisions: because
we are here in a desert place. 13 But he said unto them, Give YE them to eat.
And they said, We have no more than five loaves and two fishes; except WE
should go and buy food for all this :people. 14 For they were about five
thousand men. And he said to his :disciples, Seat them in sets of about
fifties. 15 And they did so, and seated them all. 16 And taking the five
loaves and the two fishes, he looked up to :heaven, and blessed them, and
brake; and gave to the disciples to set before the crowd. 17 And all ate and
were filled: and there was taken up what remained over to them of broken
pieces, twelve baskets.
18 And it came to pass, as he :was praying apart, the disciples were
with him: and he asked them, saying, Who do the crowds say that I am?
19 And they answered and said, John the Baptist; but others say, Elijah; and
others, that some prophet of the ancients is risen. 20 And he said to them,
But who say ye that I am? And Peter answered and said, The Christ of :God.
21 But he charged them, and commanded to tell this to no one; 22 saying
[that], The Son of man :must suffer many things, and be rejected of the
elders and chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and the third day be
raised up. 23 And he was saying to all, If any would come after me, let him
deny himself, and take up his :cross daily, and follow me. 24 For whoever
would save his :life shall lose it; but whoever shall lose his :life for my sake,
the same shall save it. 25 For what is a man profited, if he gain the whole
world, and lose or forfeit his own self? 26 For whoever shall be ashamed of
me and of my :words, of him shall the Son of :man be ashamed, when he
come in his :glory and the Father’s, and of the holy angels. 27 But I tell you
truly, There are some of them that stand here, who shall in no wise taste of
death, till they see the kingdom of :God.
28 And it came to pass about eight days after these :words, he took
with him Peter and John and James, and went up into the mountain to pray.
29 And as he was praying, the fashion of his :countenance was altered, and
his :raiment white, dazzling. 30 And lo, two men talked with him, who were
Moses and Elijah; 31 who appeared in glory, and spake of his decease
which he was about to accomplish at Jerusalem. 32 Now :Peter and those
with him were heavy with sleep: but when fully awake, they saw his :glory,
and the two men that stood with him. 33 And it came to pass, as they
were :parting from him, :Peter said unto :Jesus, Master, it is good for us to
be here: and let us make three tents; one for thee, and one for Moses, and
one for Elijah: not knowing what he said. 34 And while he was saying these
things, a cloud came and was overshadowing them: and they were afraid as
they :entered into the cloud. 35 And a voice came out of the cloud, saying,
This is my :Son, the chosen: hear HIM. 36 And when the voice was
past, :Jesus was found alone. And THEY were silent, and reported to no one
in those :days aught of what they had seen.
37 And it came to pass, on the next day, when they were come down
from the mountain, a great crowd met him. 38 And lo, a man from the crowd
shouted, saying, Teacher, I beseech thee to look upon my :son, because he
is mine only begotten: 39 and lo, a spirit taketh him, and he suddenly crieth
out; and it convulseth him with foam, and it hardly departeth from him,
bruising him sorely. 40 And I besought thy :disciples to cast it out; and they
could not. 41 And :Jesus answered and said, O faithless and perverse
generation, how long shall I be with you, and bear with you? bring hither
thy :son. 42 And as he was yet a coming, the demon rent and convulsed
him grievously. But :Jesus rebuked the unclean :spirit, and healed the boy,
and gave him back to his :father. 43 And all were astonished at the majesty
of :God.
But while all were marvelling at all the things which he did, he said to
his :disciples, 44 Let these :words sink into your :ears: for the Son of :man
shall be delivered up into men’s hands. 45 But they understood not this
saying, and it was concealed from them, that they should not perceive it;
and they were afraid to ask him about this saying. 46 And a reasoning
arose among them, which of them was the greater. 47 But when :Jesus saw
the reasoning of their :heart, he took up a little child, and set him by his side,
48 and said to them, Whoso shall receive this little :child in my :name
receiveth me: and whoso shall receive me receiveth him that sent me: for
who is lesser among you all, the same is great. 49 And John answered
and said, Master, we saw some one casting out demons in thy :name; and
we were hindering him, because he followeth not with us. 50 But :Jesus
said unto him, Hinder ye not: for who is not against you is for you.
51 And it came to pass, when the days were being fulfilled that he
should be taken up, he also steadfastly set his :face to :go to Jerusalem,
52 and sent messengers before his face: and they went, and entered into a
village of the Samaritans, to make ready for him. 53 And they did not
receive him, because his face was set toward Jerusalem. 54 And when the
disciples James and John saw this, they said, Lord, wilt thou that we bid fire
to come down from :heaven, and consume them? 55 But he turned, and
rebuked them. 56 And they went to another village.
57 And as they went on the way, some one said unto him, I will follow
thee whithersoever thou goest. 58 And :Jesus said to him, The foxes have
holes, and the birds of the heaven nests; but the Son of :man hath not
where to lay his :head. 59 And he said unto another, Follow me. But he said,
Suffer me first to go and bury my :father. 60 But he said to him, Leave the
dead to bury their own dead; but thou go, and publish abroad the kingdom
of :God. 61 And another also said, I will follow thee, Lord; but first suffer me
to bid farewell to them that are at my :house. 62 But :Jesus said unto him,
No one, having put his :hand to the plow, and looking :back, is fit for the
kingdom of :God.

Chapter 10
1 Now after these things the Lord appointed seventy others, and sent
them two and two before his face into every city and place, whither he
himself was about to come. 2 And he said unto them, The harvest indeed is
plenteous, but the laborers few: pray therefore the Lord of the harvest, that
he send forth laborers into his :harvest. 3 Go. Lo, I send you forth as lambs
amidst wolves. 4 Carry no purse, no wallet, no shoes; and salute no one on
the way. 5 And into whatever house ye shall enter first say, Peace to
this :house. 6 And if a son of peace be there, your :peace shall rest upon
him: but if not, it shall return upon you. 7 And in the same house remain,
eating and drinking such as they have: for the laborer is worthy of his :hire.
Go not from house to house. 8 And into whatever city ye enter, and they
receive you, eat what are set before you: 9 and cure the sick therein, and
say to them, The kingdom of :God is come nigh unto you. 10 But into
whatever city ye shall enter, and they receive you not, go out into the streets
thereof and say, 11 Even the dust from your :city, that cleaveth to our :feet,
we wipe off against you: nevertheless know this, that the kingdom of :God is
come nigh. 12 I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable in that :day for
Sodom, than for that :city. 13 Woe to thee, Chorazin! woe to thee,
Bethsaida! for if the mighty :works had been done in Tyre and Sidon, which
were done in you, they would have repented long ago, sitting in sackcloth
and ashes. 14 Nevertheless it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in
the judgment, than for you. 15 And, Capernaum, shalt THOU be exalted unto
heaven? thou shalt come down unto :Hades. 16 Who heareth you heareth
me; and who rejecteth you rejecteth me; but who rejecteth me rejecteth him
that sent me. 17 Now the seventy returned with joy, saying, Lord, even
the demons are subject to us in thy :name. 18 And he said to them, I
beheld :Satan fallen as lightning from :heaven. 19 Lo, I have given you the
authority to :tread upon serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of
the enemy: and nothing shall in any wise hurt you. 20 Nevertheless in this
rejoice not, that the spirits are subject to you; but rejoice that your :names
are writ in the heavens. 21 In that same :hour he rejoiced in the :Holy
Spirit, and said, I thank thee, Father, Lord of :heaven and :earth, that thou
didst hide these things from the wise and understanding, and didst reveal
them to babes: yea, :Father; for so it was well-pleasing in thy sight. 22 All
things have been delivered to me of my :Father: and no one knoweth who
the Son is, save the Father; and who the Father is, save the Son, and he to
whomsoever the Son willeth to reveal him. 23 And turning unto the disciples,
he said privately, Blessed the eyes which see what things ye see: 24 for I
say unto you, that many prophets and kings desired to see what things ye
see, and saw not; and to hear what things ye hear, and heard not.
25 And lo, a certain lawyer stood up and made trial of him, saying,
Teacher, what shall I do to inherit eternal life? 26 And he said unto him,
What is written in the law? how readest thou? 27 And he answering said,
Thou shalt love the Lord thy :God from thy whole heart, and with thy
whole :soul, and with thy whole :strength, and with thy whole :mind; and
thy :neighbor as thyself. 28 And he said to him, Thou hast answered right:
this do, and thou shalt live. 29 But he, desiring to justify himself, said
unto :Jesus, And who is my neighbor? 30 :Jesus made answer and said, A
certain man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among
robbers, who both stripped him and beat him, and departed, leaving him
half dead. 31 And by chance a certain priest was going down on that :road:
and seeing him, he passed by on the other side. 32 And likewise a Levite
also, coming to the place, and seeing him, passed by on the other side.
33 But a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was: and
seeing him, had pity, 34 and came to him, and bound up his :wounds,
pouring on oil and wine; and he set him on his own :beast, and brought him
to an inn, and took care of him. 35 And on the morrow he took out two
shillings, and gave to the inn-keeper, and said, Take care of him; and
whatever thou spendest more, I, when I come back again, will repay thee.
36 Which of these :three, thinkest thou, proved neighbor unto him that fell
among the robbers? 37 And he said, He who showed :mercy on him.
And :Jesus said to him, Go, and do THOU likewise.
38 Now as they :went on, HE entered into a certain village: and a
certain woman, Martha by name, received him into the house. 39 And SHE
had a sister called Mariam, who also sat at the feet of the Lord, and heard
his :word. 40 But Martha was distracted with much serving; and she came
up, and said, Lord, dost thou not care that my :sister did leave me to serve
alone? bid her therefore that she help me. 41 But the Lord answered and
said to her, Martha, Martha, thou art anxious and troubled about many
things: 42 but few are needful, or one: for Mariam hath chosen the good part,
which shall not be taken from her.

Chapter 11
1 And it came to pass, as he :was praying in a certain place, that as
he ceased, one of his disciples said unto him, Lord, teach us to pray, even
as John also taught his :disciples. 2 And he said to them, When ye be
praying, say, Father, Hallowed be thy :name. Thy :kingdom come. 3 Give
us day by day our :daily :bread. 4 And forgive us our :sins; for we ourselves
also forgive every one indebted to us. And bring us not into temptation.
5 And he said unto them, Which of you shall have a friend, and shall go unto
him at midnight, and say to him, Friend, lend me three loaves; 6 since a
friend of mine is come unto me from a journey, and I have nothing to set
before him; 7 and HE from within shall answer and say, Trouble me not: the
door is already shut, and my little children are with me in :bed; I cannot rise
and give thee? 8 I say unto you, Even if he will not rise and give him
because he :is his friend, yet because of his :importunity he will arise and
give him as many as he needeth. 9 And I say unto you, Ask, and it shall be
given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened to you.
10 For every one that asketh receiveth; and who seeketh findeth; and to him
that knocketh it is being opened. 11 And of which of you that is the father
shall the son ask a fish, and he for a fish give him a serpent? 12 Or again
shall ask an egg, will he give him a scorpion? 13 If ye therefore, being evil,
know how to give good gifts to your :children, how much more shall the
Father who is from heaven give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?
14 And he was casting out a dumb demon. And it came to pass,
when the demon was gone out, the dumb spake; and the crowds marvelled.
15 But some of them said, By Beelzebul the prince of the demons casteth he
out the demons. 16 And others, trying him, sought of him a sign from
heaven. 17 But HE, knowing their :thoughts, said to them, Every kingdom
divided against itself is made desolate; and a house divided against a house
falleth. 18 And if :Satan also is divided against himself, how shall
his :kingdom stand? because ye say that I cast out demons by Beelzebul.
19 And if I by Beelzebul cast out :demons, by whom do your :sons cast out?
therefore shall THEY be your judges. 20 But if I by God’s finger cast out the
demons, then is the kingdom of :God come upon you. 21 When the strong
fully armed guardeth his own :court, his :goods are in peace: 22 but when a
stronger than he shall come upon and overcome him, he taketh from him his
whole armor wherein he trusted, and divideth his :spoils. 23 Who is not with
me is against me; and who gathereth not with me scattereth. 24 The
unclean spirit when he is gone out of the man, passeth through waterless
places, seeking rest; and finding none, then he saith, I will turn back unto
my :house whence I came out. 25 And when he comes, he findeth it empty,
swept and garnished. 26 Then goeth he, and taketh along seven other
spirits more evil than himself; and they enter in and dwell there: and the last
state of that :man becometh worse than the first. 27 And it came to pass,
as he said these things, a certain woman out of the crowd lifted up her voice,
and said to him, Blessed the womb that bare thee, and the breasts which
thou didst suck. 28 But HE said, Yea rather, blessed who hear the word
of :God, and keep it.
29 And when the crowds were gathering together, he began to say,
This :generation is an evil generation: it seeketh a sign; and no sign shall be
given it but the sign of Jonah. 30 For even as :Jonah became a sign unto
the Ninevites, so shall also the Son of :man be to this :generation. 31 The
South queen shall rise up in the judgment with the men of this :generation,
and shall condemn them: because she came from the ends of the earth to
hear the wisdom of Solomon; and lo, more than Solomon is here. 32 Men of
Nineveh shall stand up in the judgment with this :generation, and shall
condemn it: because they repented at the preaching of Jonah; and lo, more
than Jonah is here. 33 No one, when he hath lighted a lamp, putteth it in a
cellar, neither under the bushel, but on the stand, that they who enter in may
see the light. 34 The lamp of the body is thine :eye: when thine :eye is single,
thy whole :body also is of light; but when it is evil, thy :body also is of
darkness. 35 Look therefore whether the light :in thee be not darkness. 36 If
therefore thy whole :body be of light, having no part dark, it shall be wholly
of light, as when the lamp with its bright :shining lighteth thee.
37 Now as he spake, a Pharisee asketh him to breakfast with him:
and he went in, and sat down to meat. 38 And the Pharisee seeing it,
marvelled that he had not first washed before :breakfast. 39 And the Lord
said unto him, Now YE the Pharisees cleanse the outside of the cup and of
the platter; but your inward :part is full of extortion and wickedness.
40 Foolish ones, did not he that made the outside make the inside also?
41 But give for alms the things within; and lo, all things are clean for you.
42 But woe to you the Pharisees! because ye tithe :mint and :rue and every
herb, and pass over :judgment and the love of :God: but these ought ye to
have done, and not to leave those undone. 43 Woe to you :Pharisees! for ye
love the chief seat in the synagogues, and the greetings in the marketplaces.
44 Woe to you! for ye are as the tombs :unseen, and the men that walk over
them know it not. 45 And a certain one of the lawyers answering saith to him,
Teacher, in saying these things thou reproachest us also. 46 And he said,
Woe to you :lawyers also! for ye load :men with burdens unbearable, and ye
yourselves touch not the burdens with one of your :fingers. 47 Woe to you!
for ye build the tombs of the prophets, and your :fathers killed them.
48 Then ye are witnesses and consent unto the works of your :fathers: for
THEY killed them, and ye build their tombs. 49 Therefore also said the
wisdom of :God, I will send unto them prophets and apostles; and some of
them they shall kill and persecute; 50 that the blood of all the prophets,
which was shed from the foundation of the world, be required of
this :generation; 51 from the blood of Abel unto the blood of Zachariah, who
perished between the altar and the house: yea, I say unto you, it shall be
required of this :generation. 52 Woe to you :lawyers! for ye took away the
key of :knowledge: ye entered not in yourselves, and those entering in ye
hindered. 53 And when he was come out thence, the scribes and the
Pharisees began to press upon him vehemently, and to provoke him to
speak of more things: 54 laying wait for him, to catch something out of
his :mouth.

Chapter 12
1 In the mean time, when the myriads of the crowd were gathered,
insomuch that they trod one upon another, he began to say unto
his :disciples first, Beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is
hypocrisy. 2 But nothing is covered up, that shall not be revealed; and hid,
that shall not be known. 3 Wherefore whatever things ye have said in the
darkness shall be heard in the light; and what ye have spoken in the ear in
the inner chambers shall be proclaimed on the housetops. 4 And I say unto
you my :friends, Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and thereafter have
no more they can do. 5 But I will warn you whom ye shall fear: Fear HIM,
who after he hath killed hath authority to cast into geenna; yea, I say unto
you, Fear HIM. 6 Are not five sparrows sold for two pence? and not one of
them is forgotten in :God’s sight. 7 But even the hairs of your :head are all
numbered. Fear not: ye are of more value than many sparrows. 8 And I say
unto you, Every one who shall confess [in] me before :men, [in] him shall the
Son of :man also confess before the angels of :God: 9 but who hath denied
me in :men’s presence shall be denied in the presence of the angels of :God.
10 And every one who shall speak a word against the Son of :man, it shall
be forgiven him: but to him that blasphemeth against the Holy Spirit it shall
not be forgiven. 11 And when they bring you before the synagogues, and
the authorities, and the powers, be not anxious how or what ye shall answer,
or what ye shall say: 12 for the Holy Spirit shall teach you in that very :hour
what ye must say. 13 And one out of the crowd said to him, Teacher, bid
my :brother divide the inheritance with me. 14 But he said to him, Man, who
made me judge or divider over you? 15 And he said unto them, See, and
keep yourselves from all covetousness: because one’s life consisteth not in
the abundance of the things he possesseth. 16 And he spake a parable
unto them, saying, The land of a certain rich man brought forth plentifully: 17
and he reasoned within himself, saying, What shall I do, because I have not
where to store my :fruits? 18 And he said, This will I do: I will pull down
my :barns, and build greater; and there will I store all the grain and
my :goods. 19 And I will say to my :soul, Soul, thou hast much goods laid up
for many years; take thine ease, eat, drink, be merry. 20 But :God said to
him, Foolish one, this :night they require thy soul of thee; and what things
thou hast prepared, whose shall they be? 21 Thus who treasureth up for
himself, and is not rich toward God. 22 And he said unto his :disciples,
Therefore I say unto you, Be not anxious for the soul, what ye shall eat; nor
yet for your :body, what ye shall put on. 23 For the soul is more than the
food, and the body than the raiment. 24 Consider the ravens, that they sow
not, neither reap; which have no store-chamber nor barn; and :God feedeth
them: of how much more value are ye than the birds! 25 And which of you
by being anxious can add a cubit unto the measure of his life? 26 If then ye
cannot do even what is least, why are ye anxious concerning the rest?
27 Consider the lilies, how they grow: they toil not, neither do they spin; yet I
say unto you, Not even Solomon in all his :glory was arrayed like one of
these. 28 But if :God doth so clothe the grass in the field, which today is,
and tomorrow is cast into the oven; how much more you, ye of little faith? 29
And seek not YE what ye shall eat, and what ye shall drink, neither be of
doubtful mind. 30 For all these do the nations of the world seek after: but
your :Father knoweth that ye have need of these things. 31 Yet seek
his :kingdom, and these shall be added to you. 32 Fear not, little :flock; for it
is your :Father’s good pleasure to give you the kingdom. 33 Sell the things
ye have, and give alms; make for yourselves purses which wax not old,
unfailing treasure in the heavens, where no thief draweth near, neither moth
destroyeth. 34 For where your :treasure is, there will your :heart be also.
35 Let your :loins be girded about, and the lamps burning; 36 and be YE like
unto men looking for their lord, when he shall return from the marriage feast;
that, when he cometh and knocketh, they may straightway open to him.
37 Blessed are those :bondmen, whom the lord when he cometh shall find
watching: Amen I say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and make them sit
down to meat, and shall come and serve them. 38 And if he shall come in
the second watch, and if in the third, and find them so, blessed are those.
39 But know this, that if the house-master had known in what hour the thief
was coming, he would have watched, and not have left his :house to be dug
through. 40 Be YE also ready: for in an hour ye think not the Son of :man
cometh. 41 And :Peter said, Lord, speakest thou this :parable unto us, or
even unto all? 42 And the Lord said, Who then is the faithful steward, the
wise, whom the lord shall set over his :household, to :give them their portion
of food in season? 43 Blessed that bondman, whom his :lord when he
cometh shall find so doing. 44 Truly I say unto you, that he will set him over
all the things he hath. 45 But if that :bondman shall say in his :heart, My :lord
delayeth his coming; and shall begin to beat the menservants and the
maidservants, and to eat and drink, and to be drunken; 46 the lord of
that :bondman shall come in a day when he expecteth not, and in an hour
when he knoweth not, and shall cut him asunder, and appoint his :portion
with the unfaithful. 47 And that :bondman, who knew the will of his :lord, and
made not ready, nor did according to his :will, shall be beaten with many
stripes; 48 but he that knew not, and did things worthy of stripes, shall be
beaten with few. And to whomever much is given, of him shall much be
required: and to whom they committed much, of him will they ask the more.
49 A fire came I to cast upon the earth; and what do I desire, if it is already
kindled? 50 But I have a baptism to be baptized with; and how am I
straitened till it be accomplished! 51 Think ye that I am come to give peace
in the earth? I tell you, Nay; but rather division: 52 for from :now on five shall
be in one house divided, three against two, and two against three. 53 They
shall be divided, father against son, and son against father; mother against
daughter, and daughter against :mother; mother in law against
her :daughter in law, and daughter in law against :mother in law. 54 And
he said also to the crowds, When ye see a cloud rising in the west,
straightway ye say [that] A shower cometh, and so it cometh to pass.
55 And when ye see a south wind blowing, ye say [that] There will be a
scorching heat; and it cometh to pass. 56 Hypocrites, ye know how to
interpret the face of the earth and the heaven; but how is it ye know not how
to interpret this :season? 57 And why even of yourselves judge ye not what
is :right? 58 For as thou art going with thine :adversary before a ruler, on the
way give diligence to be quit of him; lest haply he drag thee unto the judge,
and the judge shall deliver thee to the exactor, and the exactor shall cast
thee into prison. 59 I tell thee, Thou shalt in no wise come out thence, till
thou have paid the very last mite.

Chapter 13
1 Now some were present at that very :season reporting to him about
the Galilæans, whose :blood Pilate had mingled with their :sacrifices. 2 And
he answered and said to them, Think ye that these :Galilæans were sinners
above all the Galilæans, because they have suffered these things? 3 I tell
you, Nay: but, except ye repent, ye shall all in like manner perish. 4 Or
those :eighteen, upon whom the tower in :Siloam fell, and killed them, think
ye that they were debtors above all the men that inhabit Jerusalem? 5 I tell
you, Nay: but, except ye should repent, ye shall all likewise perish.
6 And he spake this :parable; A certain man had a fig tree planted in
his :vineyard; and he came seeking fruit thereon, and found none. 7 And he
said unto the vinedresser, Lo, these three years since I come seeking fruit
on this :fig tree, and find none: cut it down; why doth it also cumber the
ground? 8 And he answering saith to him, Lord, leave it this :year also, till I
shall dig about it, and dung it: 9 and if it bear fruit thenceforth, well; but if not,
thou shalt cut it down.
10 And he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the sabbath[s].
11 And lo, a woman having a spirit of infirmity eighteen years; and she was
bowed together, and could in no wise lift herself up. 12 And seeing
her :Jesus called her, and said to her, Woman, thou art loosed from
thine :infirmity. 13 And he laid :hands upon her: and immediately she was
made straight, and glorified :God. 14 And the synagogue-ruler, being
indignant because :Jesus had healed on the sabbath, answered and said to
the crowd [that], Six days are in which men ought to work: in them therefore
come and be healed, and not on the day of the sabbath. 15 But the Lord
answered him, and said, Hypocrites, doth not each of you on the sabbath
loose his :ox or his :ass from the manger, and lead him away to watering?
16 And ought not this woman, being a daughter of Abraham, whom :Satan
had bound, lo, eighteen years, to have been loosed from this :bond on the
day of the sabbath? 17 And as he said these things, all his :adversaries
were put to shame: and the whole crowd rejoiced for all the glorious
things :done by him. 18 He said therefore, Unto what is the kingdom
of :God like? and unto what shall I liken it? 19 It is like a grain of mustard
seed, which a man took, and cast into his own garden; and it grew, and
became a tree; and the birds of the heaven lodged in the branches thereof.
20 And again he said, Unto what shall I liken the kingdom of :God? 21 It is
like unto leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal, till
it was all leavened.
22 And he went on his way through cities and villages, teaching, and
journeying on unto Jerusalem. 23 And a certain one said to him, Lord, are
the saved few? And he said unto them, 24 Strive to enter by the narrow door:
for many, I say unto you, shall seek to enter, and shall not be able 25 when
once the house-master is risen up, and hath shut to the door, and ye begin
to stand without, and to knock at the door, saying, Lord, open to us; and he
shall answer and say to you, I know you not whence ye are; 26 then shall ye
begin to say, We were eating in thy presence and drinking, and thou didst
teach in our :streets; 27 and he shall speak, saying to you, I know not
whence ye are; depart from me, all workers of iniquity. 28 There shall be the
weeping and the gnashing of the teeth, when ye should see Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets, in the kingdom of :God, and
yourselves cast forth without. 29 And they shall come from east and west,
and from north and south, and shall sit down in the kingdom of :God. 30 And
lo, there are last who shall be first, and there are first who shall be last.
31 In that very :hour certain Pharisees came, saying to him, Get thee out,
and go hence: for Herod wishes to kill thee. 32 And he said to them, Go and
say to that :fox, Lo, I cast out demons and accomplish healings today and
tomorrow, and the third day I am perfected. 33 Nevertheless I must go on
today and tomorrow and the day following: for it cannot be that a prophet
perish out of Jerusalem. 34 Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killeth the prophets,
and stoneth those sent unto her! how oft would I have gathered thy :children
together, even as a hen gathereth her own brood under her :wings, and ye
would not! 35 Lo, your :house is left unto you; and I say unto you, Ye shall in
nowise see me, until ye shall say, Blessed who cometh in the Lord’s name.

Chapter 14
1 And it came to pass, when he went into the house of a certain of the
rulers of the Pharisees on a sabbath to eat bread, that THEY were watching
him. 2 And lo, a certain man was before him with dropsy. 3 And :Jesus
answered and spake unto the lawyers and Pharisees, saying, Is it lawful to
heal on the sabbath, or not? 4 But they were silent. And he took him, and
healed him, and let him go. 5 And he said unto them, Which of you shall
have a son or an ox fallen into a well, and will not straightway draw him up
on the sabbath day? 6 And they could not answer again unto these things.
7 And he spake a parable unto those bidden, when he marked how they
chose out the chief seats; saying unto them, 8 When thou art bidden of any
one to a marriage feast, sit not down in the chief seat; lest haply one more
honorable than thou be bidden of him, 9 and he that bade thee and him shall
come and say to thee, Give this man place; and then thou shalt begin with
shame to take the lowest place. 10 But when thou art bidden, go and take
the lowest place; that when he that hath bidden thee cometh, he shall say to
thee, Friend, go up higher: then shalt thou have glory in presence of all that
sit at meat with thee. 11 For every one that exalteth himself shall be
humbled; and who humbleth himself shall be exalted. 12 And he said to
him also that had bidden him, When thou makest a dinner or supper, call not
thy :friends, nor thy :brethren, nor thy :kinsmen, nor rich neighbors; lest
haply they also bid thee again, and recompense be made thee. 13 But
when thou makest a feast, bid the poor, maimed, lame, blind: 14 and thou
shalt be blessed; because they have not wherewith to recompense thee: for
thou shalt be recompensed in the resurrection of the just. 15 And when
one of his :fellow-guests heard these things, he said to him, Blessed
whoever eateth bread in the kingdom of :God. 16 But he said to him, A
certain man was making a great supper; and he bade many: 17 and he sent
forth his :bondman at the supper :hour to say to those bidden, Come; for
things are now ready. 18 And all with one accord began to make excuse.
The first said to him, I have bought a field, and must needs go out and see it:
Pray thee have me excused. 19 And another said, I have bought five yoke
of oxen, and go to prove them: Pray thee have me excused. 20 And another
said, I have married a wife, and therefore I cannot come. 21 And the
bondman came, and told to his :lord these things. Then the house-master
being angry said to his :bondman, Go out quickly into the streets and lanes
of the city, and bring in hither the poor and maimed and blind and lame.
22 And the bondman said, Lord, what thou didst command is come to pass
and yet there is room. 23 And the lord said unto the bondman, Go out into
the highways and hedges, and compel them to come in, that my :house be
filled. 24 For I say unto you, that none of those :men :bidden shall taste of
my :supper.
25 Now great crowds went with him: and he turned, and said unto
them, 26 If any cometh unto me, and hateth not his own :father, and :mother,
and :wife, and :children, and :brethren, and :sisters, yea, and his own :life
also, he cannot be my disciple. 27 Whoever doth not bear his own :cross,
and come after me, cannot be my disciple. 28 For which of you, desiring to
build a tower, doth not first sit down and count the cost, whether he have
wherewith to complete it? 29 Lest haply, when he hath laid a foundation,
and is not able to finish, all that behold begin to mock him, 30 saying [that],
This :man began to build, and could not finish. 31 Or what king, going to
encounter another king in war, will not sit down first and take counsel
whether he is able with ten thousand to meet him that cometh against him
with twenty thousand? 32 Or else, while the other is yet far off, he sendeth
an ambassage, and asketh for peace. 33 So therefore whoever of you
renounceth not all that he hath, cannot be my disciple. 34 :Salt therefore is
good: but if the salt also have lost savor, wherewith shall it be seasoned?
35 It is fit for neither land nor dunghill: men cast it out. Who hath ears to hear,
let him hear.

Chapter 15
1 Now all the publicans and :sinners were drawing near to him to
hear him. 2 And both the Pharisees and the scribes murmured, saying that,
This man receiveth sinners, and eateth with them. 3 And he spake unto
them this :parable saying, 4 What man of you, having a hundred sheep, and
having lost one of them, leaveth not the ninety-nine in the wilderness, and
go after the lost, until he find it? 5 And on finding it, layeth it on
his :shoulders, rejoicing. 6 And coming into the house, calleth together
his :friends and :neighbors, saying to them, Rejoice with me, for I have
found my :lost :sheep. 7 I say unto you, that thus more joy shall be
in :heaven over one repenting sinner, than over ninety-nine righteous, who
need no repentance. 8 Or what woman having ten sixpences, if she lose
one sixpence, doth not light a lamp, and sweep the house, and seek
diligently until she find it? 9 And having found it, calleth together her :friends
and neighbors, saying, Rejoice with me, for I have found the sixpence which
I had lost. 10 Thus, I say unto you, there is joy before the angels of :God
over one repenting sinner. 11 And he said, A certain man had two sons:
12 and the younger of them said to the father, Father, give me the portion of
the substance that falleth to me. And he divided for them his :living. 13 And
not many days after, the younger son gathered all together and journeyed
into a far country; and there wasted his :substance with riotous living. 14
And when he had spent all, a mighty famine arose in that :country; and HE
began to be in want. 15 And he went and joined himself to one of the
citizens of that :country; and he sent him into his :fields to feed swine. 16
And he would fain have been filled with the husks that the swine did eat: and
no one gave to him. 17 But coming to himself he said, How many hired
servants of my :father have loaves to spare, and I perish here with hunger!
18 I will arise and go to my :father, and say to him, Father, I have sinned
against :heaven, and in thy sight: 19 I am no more worthy to be called thy
son: make me as one of thy hired :servants. 20 And he arose, and came
unto his own :father. But while he was yet afar off, his :father saw him, and
pitied him, and ran, and fell upon his :neck, and kissed him much. 21 And
the son said to him, Father, I have sinned against :heaven, and in thy sight:
I am no more worthy to be called thy son, make me as one of thy
hired :servants. 22 But the father said to his :bondmen, Bring forth quickly
the best robe, and put it on him; and put a finger-ring into his :hand, and
shoes on his :feet: 23 and bring the fatted :calf, kill it, and let us eat, and
make merry: 24 for this my :son was dead, and is revived; was lost, and is
found. And they began to make merry. 25 Now his :elder :son was in the
field: and as he came near the house, he heard music and dancing. 26 And
he called to him one of the servants, and inquired what these things might
be. 27 And he told him [that], Thy :brother is come; and thy :father hath
killed the fatted :calf, because he hath received him safe and sound. 28 But
he was angry, and would not go in: and his :father came out, and entreated
him. 29 But he answered and said to his :father, Lo, these many years I
slave it for you, and I never transgressed thy commandment; and never a
kid gavest thou me, that I might make merry with my :friends: 30 but when
this thy :son came, who hath devoured thy :living with harlots, thou killedst
for him the fatted calf. 31 And he said to him, Child, THOU art ever with me,
and all :mine are thine. 32 But it was meet to make merry and be glad:
because this thy :brother was dead, and is alive; and was lost, and is found.

Chapter 16
1 And he said also unto the disciples, There was a certain rich man,
who had a steward; and the same was accused to him as wasting
his :goods. 2 And he called him, and said to him, What is this I hear of thee?
render the account of thy :stewardship; for thou canst no longer be steward.
3 And the steward said within himself, What shall I do, seeing that my :lord
taketh away the stewardship from me? To dig I have no strength; to beg I
am ashamed. 4 I am resolved what to do, that, when I am put out of the
stewardship, they may receive me into their own :houses. 5 And calling to
him each one of the debtors of his :lord, he said to the first, How much owest
thou my :lord? 6 And he said, Hundred measures of oil. And he said to him,
Take thy :papers, and sit down and write quickly fifty. 7 Then said he to
another, And how much owest THOU? And he said, Hundred measures of
grain. He saith to him, Take thy :papers, and write eighty. 8 And the lord
commended the steward of :unrighteousness for doing wisely: for the sons
of this :age are for their :own :generation wiser than the sons of the light.
9 And I say unto you, Make for yourselves friends out of the mammon
of :unrighteousness; that, when it should fail, they may receive you into the
eternal tabernacles. 10 Who is faithful in very little is faithful also in much:
and who is unrighteous in very little is unrighteous also in much. 11 If
therefore ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous mammon, who will
commit to your trust the true riches? 12 And if ye have not been faithful
in :another’s, who will give you :ours? 13 No domestic can serve two lords:
for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to one,
and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon. 14 And the
Pharisees, being lovers of money, heard all these things; and scoffed at him.
15 And he said to them, YE are they that justify yourselves before :men;
but :God knoweth your :hearts: because what is exalted among men is an
abomination before :God. 16 The law and the prophets were until John:
from that time the gospel of the kingdom of :God is preached, and every one
entereth violently into it. 17 But it is easier for :heaven and :earth to pass
away, than for one tittle of the law to fall. 18 Every one that putteth away
his :wife, and marrieth another, committeth adultery: and who marrieth one
put away from a husband committeth adultery. 19 Now a certain man
was rich, and was clothed in purple and fine linen, making merry every day
in splendor; 20 and a certain poor man, Lazarus by name, was laid at
his :gate, full of sores, 21 and desiring to be fed with what fell from the table
of the rich man; yea, even the dogs came and licked his :sores. 22 And it
came to pass, that the poor man died, and was carried away by the angels
unto the bosom of Abraham: and the rich man also died, and was buried.
23 And in :Hades he lifted up his :eyes, being in torments, and seeth
Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his :bosom. 24 And HE cried and said,
Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he dip the tip
of his :finger in water, and cool my :tongue; for I am in anguish in this :flame.
25 But Abraham said, Child, remember that thou in thy :life receivedst
thy :good things, and Lazarus likewise the evil things: but now here he is
comforted, and thou art in anguish. 26 And with all this, between us and you
a great gulf is fixed so that who would pass from hence unto you be not able,
and that none may cross over thence unto us. 27 And he said, I pray thee
therefore, father, that thou wouldest send him to the house of my :father;
28 for I have five brethren; that he testify to them, lest they also come into
this :place of :torment. 29 But Abraham saith, They have Moses and the
prophets; let them hear them. 30 And he said, Nay, father Abraham: but if
one go unto them from the dead, they will repent. 31 And he said to him, If
they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded, if one
rise from the dead.

Chapter 17
1 And he said unto his :disciples, It is impossible but that :stumblings
should come; but woe to him, through whom they come! 2 Well for him if a
millstone were hanged about his :neck, and he were thrown into the sea,
rather than that he should stumble one of these :little ones. 3 Take heed to
yourselves: if thy :brother sin, rebuke him; and if he repent, forgive him.
4 And if he sin against thee seven times in the day, and seven times turn
again to thee, saying, I repent; thou shalt forgive him. 5 And the
apostles said to the Lord, Increase our faith. 6 And the Lord said, If ye have
faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye would say to this :sycamine tree, Be
rooted up, and be planted in the sea; and it would obey you. 7 But who
of you, having a bondman plowing or keeping sheep, who will say unto him,
when he is come in from the field, Come straightway and sit down to meat;
8 but will not rather say to him, Make ready wherewith I may sup, and gird
thyself, and serve me, till I eat and drink; and afterward thou shalt eat and
drink? 9 Doth he thank the bondman because he did the things
commanded? 10 So ye also, when ye shall have done all the things
commanded you, say [that], We are unprofitable bondmen; we have done
what was our duty to do.
11 And it came to pass, on the way to Jerusalem, HE also was
passing through the midst of the borders of Samaria and Galilee. 12 And as
he entered into a certain village, ten men, lepers, met him, who stood up
afar off: 13 and they lifted up their voice, saying, Jesus, Master, have mercy
on us. 14 And seeing them, he said to them, Go and show yourselves to the
priests. And it came to pass, as they went, they were cleansed. 15 And one
of them, seeing that he was healed, turned back, with a loud voice
glorifying :God; 16 and he fell upon his face at his :feet, giving him thanks:
and HE was a Samaritan. 17 And :Jesus answered, and said, Were not the
ten cleansed? but where are the nine? 18 Were none found that returned to
give glory to :God, save this alien? 19 And he said to him, Arise and go:
thy :faith hath made thee whole.
20 And asked by the Pharisees, when the kingdom of :God cometh,
he answered them and said, The kingdom of :God cometh not with
observation: 21 neither shall they say, Lo, here! or, There! for lo, the
kingdom of :God is among you. 22 And he said unto the disciples, Days
will come, when ye shall desire to see one of the days of the Son of :man,
and ye shall not see. 23 And they shall say to you, Lo, there! or Lo, here! go
not away, nor follow after them: 24 for just as the lightning, when it lighteneth
out of the one part under the heaven, shineth unto the other part under
heaven; so shall the Son of :man be. 25 But first must he suffer many things
and be rejected of this :generation. 26 And as it came to pass in the days of
Noah, thus shall it be also in the days of the Son of :man. 27 They ate, drank,
married, were given in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ark,
and the flood came, and destroyed all. 28 Likewise even as it came to pass
in the days of Lot; they ate, drank, bought, sold, planted, builded; 29 but on
the day Lot went out from Sodom fire rained and brimstone from heaven,
and destroyed all: 30 after the same manner shall it be on the day the Son
of :man is being revealed. 31 On that :day who shall be on the housetop,
and his :goods in the house, let him not go down to take them away: and let
him in the field likewise not return back. 32 Remember the wife of Lot.
33 Whoever shall seek to gain his :life shall lose it: but whosoever shall lose
his life shall save it alive. 34 I say unto you, On that :night two shall be on
one bed; the one shall be taken along, and the other shall be left. 35 Two
women shall be grinding together; the one shall be taken along, and the
other shall be left. 37 And they in answer say to him, Where, Lord? But he
said to them, Where the body is there will the eagles also be gathered
together.

Chapter 18
1 And he spake a parable to them to the end that they :ought always
to pray, and not to faint; 2 saying, In a certain city was a certain judge, who
feared not :God, and regarded not man: 3 and a widow was in that :city; and
she would be coming unto him, saying, Avenge me of mine :adversary.
4 And he would not for a time: but afterward he said within himself, Though
I fear not :God, nor regard man, 5 yet because this :widow troubleth me, I
will avenge her, lest she wear me out by her continual coming. 6 And the
Lord said, Hear what the judge of :unrighteousness saith. 7 And shall
not :God avenge his :elect, that cry to him day and night, and he
longsuffering over them? 8 I say unto you, that he will avenge them
speedily. Nevertheless, when the Son of :man cometh, shall he really find
the faith on the earth?
9 And he spake also this :parable unto certain who trusted in
themselves that they were righteous, and set the rest at nought: 10 Two
men went up into the temple to pray; one a Pharisee, and the other a
publican. 11 The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself, :God, I thank
thee, that I am not as the rest of :men, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or
even as this :publican. 12 I fast twice a week, tithe all that I get. 13 But the
publican, standing afar off, would not lift up so much as his :eyes
unto :heaven, but smote his own :breast, saying, :God, be merciful to me
the sinner. 14 I say to you, This one went down unto his :house justified
rather than that one: because every one that exalteth himself shall be
humbled; but who humbleth himself shall be exalted.
15 And they were bringing to him also their babes, that he touch them:
but the disciples, seeing it, rebuked them. 16 But :Jesus called the[m]
babes unto him, saying, Suffer the little children to come unto me, and
hinder them not: for of such is the kingdom of :God. 17 Amen I say unto you,
Whoso shall not receive the kingdom of :God as a little child, shall in nowise
enter therein.
18 And a certain ruler asked him, saying, Good Teacher, what shall I
do to inherit eternal life? 19 And :Jesus said to him, Why callest thou me
good? none is good, save one, :God. 20 Thou knowest the commandments,
Do not commit adultery, Kill not, Steal not, Bear no false witness, Honor
thy :father and :mother. 21 And he said, All these have I observed from my
youth. 22 And when :Jesus heard it, he said to him, One thing thou lackest
yet: sell all that thou hast, and distribute to the poor, and thou shalt have
treasure in the heavens, and come, follow me. 23 But when he heard these
things, he became exceeding sorrowful; for he was very rich. 24 And :Jesus
seeing him said, How hardly shall they that have possessions enter into the
kingdom of :God! 25 For it is easier for a camel to enter in through a
needle’s eye, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of :God. 26 And
they that heard it said, And who can be saved? 27 But he said, The things
impossible with men are possible with :God. 28 And :Peter said, Lo, we
have left our :own, and followed thee. 29 And he said to them, Amen I say
unto you that there is none that hath left house, or wife, or brethren, or
parents, or children, for the kingdom of :God’s sake, 30 who shall not
receive manifold more in this :season, and in the age to :come eternal life.
31 And he took to him the twelve, and said to them, Lo, we go up to
Jerusalem, and all the things written through the prophets shall be
accomplished to the Son of :man. 32 For he shall be delivered up to the
nations, and shall be mocked, and shamefully treated, and spit upon: 33 and
they shall scourge and kill him: and the third :day he shall rise again. 34 And
THEY understood none of these things; and this :saying was hid from them,
and they perceived not the things said.
35 And it came to pass, as he :drew nigh unto Jericho, a certain blind
man sat by the way side begging: 36 and hearing a crowd going by, he
inquired what this be. 37 And they reported to him, that :Jesus the
Nazorean passeth by. 38 And he cried, saying, Jesus, David’s son, have
mercy on me. 39 And they that went before rebuked him, that he should
keep still: but he cried out all the more, David’s son, have mercy on me.
40 And :Jesus stopped, and commanded him to be brought unto him: and
when he approached, he asked him, 41 What wilt thou I should do to thee?
And he said, Lord, that I look up. 42 And :Jesus said to him, Look up:
thy :faith hath made thee whole. 43 And immediately he looked up, and
followed him, glorifying :God: and all the people seeing it gave praise
to :God.

Chapter 19
1 And he entered and was passing through :Jericho. 2 And lo, a man
called by name Zacchæus; and HE was a chief publican, and moreover rich.
3 And he sought to see :Jesus who he was; and could not for the crowd,
because he was little of :stature. 4 And he ran on :before, and climbed up a
sycomore tree to see him: for he was to pass that way. 5 And as :Jesus
came to the place, he looked up, and said unto him, Zacchæus, make haste,
and come down; for today I must abide at thy :house. 6 And he made haste,
and came down, and received him joyfully. 7 And all murmured, when they
saw it, saying, [that] He is gone in to lodge with a sinner [man]. 8 And
Zacchæus stood, and said unto the Lord, Lo, Lord, the half of my :goods I
give to the poor; and if I have wrongfully exacted aught of any man, I restore
fourfold. 9 And :Jesus said unto him [that], Today is salvation come to
this :house, forasmuch as he also is Abraham’s son. 10 For the Son of :man
came to seek and to save what is lost.
11 And as they heard these things, he added and spake a parable,
because he was nigh to Jerusalem, and they supposed that the kingdom
of :God was immediately to appear. 12 He said therefore, A certain
nobleman went into a far country, to receive for himself a kingdom, and to
return. 13 And he called ten of his own bondmen, and gave them ten
pounds, and said unto them, Trade herewith till I come. 14 But his :citizens
hated him, and sent an ambassage after him, saying, We will not that this
man reign over us. 15 And it came to pass, on his return having received the
kingdom, he also ordered these :bondmen, unto whom he had given the
silver, to be called to him, that he might know what they had gained by
trading. 16 And the first came along saying, Lord, thy :pound hath gained
ten pounds more. 17 And he said to him, Well done, good bondman:
because thou wast found faithful in a very little, have authority over ten cities.
18 And the second came, saying, Thy :pound, Lord, hath made five pounds.
19 And he said to this one also, Be thou also over five cities. 20 And the
other came, saying, Lord, lo, thy :pound, which I kept laid up in a napkin:
21 for I feared thee, because thou art an austere man: takest up what thou
layedst not down, and reapest what thou didst not sow. 22 He saith to him,
Out of thy :mouth will I judge thee, wicked bondman. Thou knewest that I
am an austere man, taking up what I laid not down, and reaping what I did
not sow? 23 then wherefore gavest thou not my silver into a bank, and I at
my coming should have required it with interest? 24 And he said to them
that stood by, Take away from him the pound, and give to him that hath the
ten pounds. 25 And they said to him, Lord, he hath ten pounds. 26 I say
unto you, that to every one that hath shall be given, but from him that hath
not, even what he hath shall be taken away. 27 But these mine :enemies,
that would not have me reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before
me. 28 And on saying these things he went on before, going up to
Jerusalem.
29 And it came to pass, as he approached Bethphage and Bethany,
at the mount that is called Olivet, he sent two of the disciples, 30 saying, Go
into the village over against you; in which as ye enter ye shall find a colt tied,
whereon no man ever yet sat: and loose and bring him. 31 And if any one
ask you, Why loose ye him? thus shall ye say [that], The Lord hath need of
him. 32 And they that were sent went away, and found even as he said to
them. 33 And as they were loosing the colt, its :owners said unto them, Why
loose ye the colt? 34 And they said [that], The Lord hath need of him.
35 And they brought him unto :Jesus: and they threw their garments upon
the colt, and set :Jesus thereon. 36 And as he went, they spread their
own :garments in the way. 37 And as he was now approaching, at the
descent of the mount of :Olives, the whole multitude of the disciples began
to rejoice and praise :God with a great voice for all the mighty works which
they had seen; 38 saying,
Blessed the King
That cometh in the Lord’s Name:
Peace in heaven,
And glory in the highest.
39 And some of the Pharisees from the crowd said unto him, Teacher,
rebuke thy :disciples. 40 And he answered and said, I tell you if these shall
be silent, the stones will cry out. 41 And as he approached, he saw the
city and wept over it, 42 saying [that], If thou also hadst known this :day, the
things belonging unto peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes. 43 For
days shall come upon thee, and thine :enemies shall cast up a bank about
thee, and surround thee, and keep thee in on every side, 44 and shall dash
to the ground thee and thy :children within thee; and they shall not leave in
thee stone upon stone; because thou knewest not the season of
thy :visitation. 45 And he entered into the temple, and began to cast out
them that sold, 46 saying to them, It is written, And my :house shall be a
house of prayer: but YE have made it a den of robbers.
47 And he was teaching :daily in the temple. But the chief priests and
the scribes and the principal men of the people sought to destroy him:
48 and they found nothing they might do; for the people all hung upon him,
listening.

Chapter 20
1 And it came to pass, on one of the days, as he was teaching the
people in the temple, and preaching the gospel, the chief priests and the
scribes with the elders came upon him; 2 and they spake, saying unto him,
Tell us: By what authority doest thou these things? or who is he that gave
thee this authority? 3 And he answered and said unto them, I also will ask
you a word; and tell me: 4 The baptism of John, was it from heaven, or from
men? 5 And they reasoned with themselves, saying [that], If we shall say,
From heaven; he will say, Why did ye not believe him? 6 But if we shall say,
From men; all the people will stone us: for it is persuaded John was a
prophet. 7 And they answered, they knew not whence. 8 And :Jesus said to
them, Neither tell I you by what authority I do these. 9 And he began to
speak unto the people this parable: A man planted a vineyard, and let it out
to husbandmen, and went into another country for a long time[s]. 10 And at
the season he sent unto the husbandmen a bondman, that they should give
him of the fruit of the vineyard: but the husbandmen beat him, and sent him
away empty. 11 And he sent yet another bondman: and him also they beat,
and handled shamefully, and sent away empty. 12 And he sent yet a third:
and him also they wounded, and cast forth. 13 And the lord of the vineyard
said, What shall I do? I will send my beloved :son; mayhap they will
reverence this one. 14 But the husbandmen seeing him, reasoned one with
another, saying, This is the heir; let us kill him, that the inheritance be ours.
15 And they cast him forth out of the vineyard, and killed him. What
therefore will the lord of the vineyard do to them? 16 He will come and
destroy these :husbandmen, and will give the vineyard to others. And on
hearing it, they said, Be it not so! 17 But he looked upon them, and said,
What then is this that is written,
The stone which the builders rejected,
The same was made head of the corner?
18 Every one that falleth on that :stone shall be broken to pieces; but on
whomever it shall fall, it will scatter him as dust. 19 And the scribes and
the chief priests sought to lay :hands on him in that very hour; and they
feared the people: for they perceived that he spake this :parable against
them. 20 And they watched him, and sent forth spies, who feigned
themselves to be righteous, that they might take hold of his speech, so as to
deliver him up to the rule and the authority of the governor. 21 And they
asked him, saying, Teacher, we know that thou sayest rightly, and teachest,
and acceptest not man’s face, but of a truth teachest the way of :God: 22 Is
it lawful for us to give tribute to Cæsar, or not? 23 But he perceived
their :craftiness and said unto them, 24 Show me a shilling. Whose image
and superscription hath it? And they said, Cæsar’s. 25 And he said unto
them, Then render to Cæsar Cæsar’s things: and to :God, :God’s. 26 And
they were not able to take hold of the saying before the people: and they
marvelled at his :answer, and were silent.
27 And some of the Sadducees came to him (who say there is no
resurrection), 28 and asked him, saying, Teacher, Moses wrote to us, If
one’s brother die, having a wife, and HE be childless, that his :brother should
take the wife, and raise up seed to his :brother. 29 Accordingly there were
seven brethren: and the first took a wife, and died childless; 30 and the
second: 31 and the third took her; and likewise the seven also left no
children, and died. 32 Afterward the woman also died. 33 In the resurrection
therefore whose wife of them shall the woman be? for the seven had her to
wife. 34 And :Jesus said to them, The sons of this :age marry, and are given
in marriage: 35 but those accounted worthy to attain to that :age, and the
resurrection :from the dead, neither marry, nor are married off: 36 for neither
can they die any more: for they are equals of angels; and are God’s sons,
being sons of the resurrection. 37 But that the dead are raised, even Moses
showed, in the Bush passage, when he calleth the Lord the God of
Abraham, and God of Isaac, and God of Jacob. 38 Now he is not God of the
dead, but of the living: for all live to him. 39 And certain of the scribes
answering said, Teacher, thou hast well said. 40 For they durst no more ask
him aught. 41 And he said unto them, How say they that the Christ is
David’s son? 42 For David himself saith in the book of Psalms,
The Lord said to my :Lord,
Sit on my right,
43 Till I set thine :enemies as a footstool to thy :feet.
44 David therefore calleth him Lord, and how is he his son?
45 And in the hearing of all the people he said to his :disciples,
46 Beware of the scribes, who desire to walk in robes, and love salutations
in the markets, and chief seats in the synagogues, and chief places at the
feasts; 47 who devour the houses of the widows, and for a pretence make
long prayers: these shall receive greater condemnation.

Chapter 21
1 And he looked up, and saw the rich casting their :gifts into the
treasury. 2 And he saw a certain poor widow casting in thither two mites.
3 And he said, I tell you truly that this :poor :widow cast in more than they all:
4 for all these did of their :superfluity cast in unto the gifts; but SHE of
her :want cast in all the living that she had.
5 And as some spake of the temple, how it was adorned with goodly
stones and offerings, he said, 6 As for these which ye behold, days will
come, in which there shall not be left here stone upon stone that shall not be
thrown down. 7 And they asked him, saying, Teacher, when therefore shall
these be? and what shall be the sign when these are about to come to pass?
8 And he said, See ye be not led astray: for many shall come in my :name,
saying, I am he; and, The season is near; go ye not after them. 9 And when
ye shall hear of wars and tumults, be not terrified: for these must needs
come to pass first; but the end is not immediately.
10 Then said he to them, Nation shall rise against nation, and
kingdom against kingdom; 11 and great earthquakes shall be, and in diverse
places famines and pestilences; and terrors shall be and great signs from
heaven. 12 But before all these, they shall lay their :hands on you, and
persecute, delivering you up into the synagogues and prisons, you being
brought before kings and governors for my :name’s sake. 13 It shall turn out
to you for a testimony. 14 Settle it therefore in your :hearts, not to meditate
beforehand how to answer: 15 for I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which
all your :adversaries shall not be able to withstand or gainsay. 16 But ye
shall be delivered up even by parents, and brethren, and kinsfolk, and
friends; and some of you shall they put to death. 17 And ye shall be hated of
all because of my name. 18 And not a hair of your :head shall perish. 19 In
your :patience ye shall win your :souls. 20 But when ye should see
Jerusalem compassed with armies, then know that her :desolation is nigh.
21 Then let them in :Judæa flee unto the mountains; and let them in the
midst of her depart; and let not them that are in the countries enter therein.
22 For these are days of vengeance, for the fulfilling of all the things written.
23 Woe to the pregnant and the suck-giving in those :days! for great distress
shall be upon the land, and wrath to this :people. 24 And they shall fall by
the sword’s edge, and shall be led captive into all the nations: and
Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the nations until the seasons of the
nations (and they shall be) are fulfilled. 25 And signs shall be in sun and
moon and stars; and upon the earth distress of nations, in perplexity for the
roaring of sea and billow; 26 men fainting for fear, and expectation of the
things coming on the inhabited earth; for the powers of the heavens shall be
shaken. 27 And then shall they see the Son of :man coming in a cloud with
power and great glory. 28 But when these things begin to come to pass,
look up, and lift up your :heads; because your :redemption draweth nigh.
29 And he spake to them a parable: see the fig tree, and all the trees:
30 when they now shoot forth, ye see it and know of yourselves
that :summer is now nigh. 31 Thus ye also, when ye should see these
things coming to pass, know that the kingdom of :God is nigh. 32 Amen I
say unto you that this :race shall not pass away, till all be accomplished.
33 The heaven and the earth shall pass away: but my :words shall not pass
away. 34 But take heed to yourselves, lest haply your :hearts be
overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and life’s cares, and
that :day come upon you suddenly as a snare: 35 for so shall it come upon
all that dwell on the face of all the earth. 36 But watch at every season,
making supplication, that ye may prevail to escape all these things that shall
come to pass, and to stand before the Son of :man.
37 And every :day he was teaching in the temple; and every :night he
went out, and lodged in the mount that is called Olivet. 38 And the whole
people came early in the morning unto him in the temple, to hear him.

Chapter 22
1 Now the feast of :unleavened loaves drew nigh, which is called
Passover. 2 And the chief priests and the scribes sought how they might
slay him; for they feared the people. 3 And Satan entered into Judas,
the one called Iscariot, being of the number of the twelve. 4 And he went
away, and conversed with the chief priests and captains, :how he might
deliver him to them. 5 And they rejoiced, and agreed to give him money.
6 And he consented, and sought opportunity to deliver him to them in the
absence of a crowd.
7 And the day of :unleavened loaves came, when the passover must
be sacrificed. 8 And he sent Peter and John, saying, Go and prepare for us
the passover, that we may eat. 9 And they said to him, Where wilt thou that
we make ready? 10 And he said to them, Lo, when ye are entered into the
city, a man shall meet you bearing a pitcher of water; follow him into the
house whereinto he goeth. 11 And ye shall say unto the house-master, The
Teacher saith to thee, Where is the guest-chamber, where I shall eat the
passover with my :disciples? 12 And HE will show you a large upper room
furnished: there make ready. 13 And they went, and found as he had said to
them: and they prepared the passover. 14 And when the hour was
come, he sat down, and the apostles with him. 15 And he said unto them,
With desire have I desired to eat this :passover with you before I suffer:
16 for I say unto you, I shall not eat it, until it be fulfilled in the kingdom
of :God. 17 And he received a cup, and when he had given thanks, he said,
Take this, and divide it among yourselves: 18 for I say unto you, I shall not
drink from now on of the fruit of the vine, until the kingdom of :God come.
19 And he took a loaf, and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave
to them, saying, This is my body :given for you: this do in :remembrance of
me. 20 And the cup in like manner after :supper, saying, This :cup is the
new covenant in my :blood, :shed for you. 21 But lo, the hand of him that
delivereth me up is with me on the table. 22 For the Son of :man indeed
goeth, as is determined: but woe to that :man through whom he is delivered
up! 23 And THEY began to question among themselves, as to which of them
it was that should do this. 24 And a contention also arose among them,
as to which of them was accounted to be greater. 25 And he said to them,
The kings of the nations lord it over them; and who have authority over them
are called Benefactors. 26 Not so ye, however: but the greater among you,
let him become as the younger; and who is chief, as he that serveth. 27 For
who is greater, who sitteth at meat, or who serveth? not who sitteth at meat?
but I am in the midst of you as who serveth. 28 But YE are they that have
continued with me in my :trials; 29 and I appoint unto you, even as
my :Father appointed unto me, a kingdom, 30 that ye may eat and drink at
my :table in my :kingdom, and shall sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes
of :Israel. 31 Simon, Simon, lo, :Satan demanded to have you, to sift you
as :grain: 32 but I made supplication for thee, that thy :faith fail not; and
when once THOU hast turned again, establish thy :brethren. 33 And he said
to him, Lord, with thee I am ready to go both to prison and to death. 34 And
he said, I tell thee, Peter, the cock shall not crow today, until thou shalt
thrice deny that thou knowest me. 35 And he said to them, When I sent
you forth without purse, and wallet, and shoes, lacked ye aught? And they
said, Naught. 36 And he said to them, But now, who hath a purse, let him
take it, likewise also a wallet; and who hath none, let him sell his :cloak, and
buy a sword. 37 For I say unto you that this which is written must be fulfilled
in me, :And he was reckoned with the lawless: yea, what concerneth me
hath fulfillment. 38 And they said, Lord, lo, here are two swords. And he
said to them, It is enough.
39 And he came out, and went according to his :custom unto the
mount of :Olives; and the disciples also followed him. 40 And when he was
at the place, he said to them, Pray not to enter into temptation. 41 And HE
was parted from them about a stone’s throw; and he knelt and prayed,
42 saying, Father, if thou wilt, remove this :cup from me: nevertheless not
my :will, but :thine, be done. 43 And an angel appeared to him from :heaven,
strengthening him. 44 And being in agony he prayed more earnestly; and
his :sweat became as if great drops of blood were falling upon the ground.
45 And when he rose from :prayer, he came unto the disciples, and found
them sleeping for :sorrow, 46 and said to them, Why sleep ye? rise and pray
that ye enter not into temptation. 47 While he yet spake, lo, a crowd,
and the one called Judas, one of the twelve, went before them; and he drew
near to :Jesus to kiss him. 48 But Jesus said to him, Judas, deliverest thou
up the Son of :man with a kiss? 49 And when those about him saw what
would follow, they said, Lord, shall we smite with the sword? 50 And a
certain one of them smote the bondman of the high priest, and struck off
his :right :ear. 51 But :Jesus answered and said, Suffer ye thus far. And he
touched his :ear, and healed him. 52 And Jesus said to the chief priests,
and captains of the temple, and elders, that were come against him, Are ye
come out, as against a robber, with swords and staves? 53 When I was
daily with you in the temple, ye stretched not forth :hands against me: but
this is your :hour, and the power of :darkness.
54 And they seized him, and led him away, and led him into the
house of the high priest. But :Peter followed afar off. 55 And when they had
kindled a fire in the midst of the court, and had sat down together, :Peter sat
in the midst of them. 56 And a certain maid seeing him as he was sitting in
the light, and looking steadfastly on him, said, This man also was with him.
57 But he denied, saying, Woman, I know him not. 58 And after a little
another saw him, and said, Thou also art one of them. But :Peter said, Man,
I am not. 59 And after the space of about one hour, a certain other
confidently affirmed, saying, Of a truth this man also was with him; for he
also is a Galilæan. 60 But :Peter said, Man, I know not what thou sayest.
And immediately, while he yet spake, a cock crew. 61 And the Lord turned,
and looked upon :Peter. And :Peter remembered the word of the Lord, how
that he said to him [that], Before the cock crow this day thou shalt deny me
thrice. 62 And going [out] outside he wept bitterly. 63 And the men that
held him mocked and beat him. 64 And they blindfolded him, and asked,
saying, Prophesy: who is he that struck thee? 65 And many other things
spake they against him reviling.
66 And when it was day, the eldership of the people were gathered,
both chief priests and scribes; and they led him away to their :Sanhedrin,
saying, 67 If thou art the Christ, tell us. But he said to them, If I tell you, ye
will in no wise believe: 68 and if I ask, ye will in no wise answer. 69 But
from :now on shall the Son of :man be seated at the right hand of the power
of :God. 70 And all said, Art thou then the Son of :God? And he said unto
them, Ye say that I am. 71 And they said, What further need have we of
witness? for we ourselves have heard from his own :mouth.

Chapter 23
1 And the whole multitude of them rose up, and brought him
before :Pilate. 2 And they began to accuse him, saying, We found this man
perverting our :nation, and forbidding to give tributes to Cæsar, and saying
that he himself is Christ a king. 3 And :Pilate asked him, saying, Art thou the
King of the Jews? And he answered him and said, THOU sayest.
4 And :Pilate said unto the chief priests and the crowds, I find no fault in
this :man. 5 But they were the more urgent, saying [that], He stirreth up the
people, teaching throughout all :Judæa, and beginning from :Galilee even
unto here. 6 But when Pilate heard it, he asked whether the man is a
Galilæan. 7 And when he knew that he was of the jurisdiction of Herod, he
sent him back to Herod, who himself also was at Jerusalem in these :days.
8 Now when Herod saw :Jesus, he was exceeding glad: for he was of a long
time desirous to see him, because he had :heard concerning him; and he
hoped to see some sign done by him. 9 And he questioned him in many
words; but HE answered him nothing. 10 And the chief priests and the
scribes stood, vehemently accusing him. 11 And Herod with his soldiers set
him at nought, and mocked, and arrayed in gorgeous apparel sent him back
to :Pilate. 12 And Herod and Pilate became friends with each other that very
day: for before they were at enmity between themselves. 13 And Pilate
called together the chief priests and the rulers and the people, 14 and said
unto them, Ye brought me this :man, as perverting the people: and lo, I,
having examined him before you, found no fault in this :man touching those
things whereof ye accuse him: 15 no, nor yet Herod: for he sent him back
unto us; and lo, nothing worthy of death hath been done by him. 16 I will
therefore chastise him, and release him. 18 But they cried out all together,
saying, Away with this man, and release to us :Barabbas:—19 who for a
certain insurrection made in the city, and for murder, was cast into :prison.
20 And :Pilate called to them again, desiring to release :Jesus; 21 but they
shouted, saying, Crucify, crucify him. 22 And he said unto them a third time,
Why, what evil hath this man done? I have found no cause of death in him:
I will therefore chastise and release him. 23 But they were urgent with loud
voices, asking that he be crucified. And their :voices prevailed. 24 And
Pilate gave sentence that what they asked be done. 25 And he released
him that for insurrection and murder had been cast into prison, whom they
asked for; but :Jesus he delivered up to their :will.
26 And when they led him away, they laid hold upon one Simon of
Cyrene, coming from the field, and laid on him the cross, to bear it
after :Jesus. 27 And a great multitude of the people followed him, and of
women who bewailed and lamented him. 28 But Jesus turning unto them
said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for yourselves,
and for your :children. 29 For lo, days are coming, in which they shall say,
Blessed the barren, and the wombs that bare not and the breasts that gave
not to suck. 30 Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, Fall on us;
and to the hills, Cover us. 31 For if they do these things in the green tree,
what shall be done in the dry? 32 And two others, malefactors, were also
led with him to be put to death. 33 And when they came unto the place
which is called Skull, there they crucified him, and the malefactors, one on
the right and the other on the left. 34 And Jesus said, Father, forgive them;
for they know not what they do. And parting his :garments among them,
they cast a lot. 35 And the people stood beholding. And the rulers also
scoffed, saying, He saved others; let him save himself, if this is the Christ
of :God, the chosen. 36 And the soldiers also mocked him, coming to him,
offering him vinegar, 37 and saying, If thou art the King of the Jews, save
thyself. 38 And an inscription was also over him, THIS is THE KING OF THE
JEWS. 39 And one of the hanged malefactors railed on him, saying, Art not
thou the Christ? save thyself and us. 40 But the other answered, and
rebuking him said, Dost not even thou fear :God, for thou art in the same
condemnation? 41 And we indeed justly; for we receive due reward of our
deeds: but this man hath done nothing amiss. 42 And he said, Jesus,
remember me when thou comest in thy :kingdom. 43 And he said to him,
Amen I say unto thee, Today shalt thou be with me in :Paradise. 44 And it
was now about the sixth hour, and darkness came over the whole earth until
the ninth hour, 45 the sun failing: and the veil of the sanctuary was rent
amidst. 46 And :Jesus cried with a loud voice, and said, Father, into thy
hands I commend my :spirit: and having said this, he breathed his last.
47 And when the centurion saw what was done, he glorified :God, saying,
Certainly this was a righteous :man. 48 And all the crowds that came
together to this :sight, seeing what things were done, returned smiting
their :breasts. 49 And all his :acquaintance, and the women that followed
with him from :Galilee, stood afar off, seeing these things.
50 And lo, a man Joseph by name, who was a councillor, a good man
and righteous 51 (he had not consented to their :counsel and :deed), of
Arimathæa, a city of the Jews, who was looking for the kingdom of :God:
52 this man went to :Pilate, and asked for the body of :Jesus. 53 And he took
it down, and wrapped it in a linen cloth, and laid him in a tomb hewn in stone,
where no one had yet lain. 54 And it was Preparation day, and a sabbath
began to dawn. 55 And the women, who had come with him out of :Galilee,
followed after and beheld the tomb, and how his :body was laid. 56 And they
returned, and prepared spices and ointments.
And on the sabbath they rested according to the commandment.

Chapter 24
1 But on the first day of the week, at early dawn, they came unto the
tomb, bringing the spices which they had prepared. 2 And they found the
stone rolled away from the tomb. 3 And they entered in, and found not the
body of the Lord Jesus. 4 And it came to pass, while they were perplexed
thereabout, [and] lo, two men stood by them in dazzling apparel: 5 and as
they were affrighted and bowed down their :faces unto the earth, they said
unto them, Why seek ye the living one among the dead? 6 He is not here,
but is risen: remember how he spake to you when he was yet in :Galilee,
7 saying that the Son of :man must be delivered up into sinful men’s hands,
and be crucified, and the third day rise again. 8 And they remembered
his :words, 9 and returned from the tomb, and reported all these things to
the eleven, and to all the rest. 10 Now they were Mary :Magdalene, and
Jōana, and Mary the mother of James: and the other women with them told
these things unto the apostles. 11 And these :words appeared in their sight
as idle talk; and they disbelieved them. 12 But :Peter arose, and ran
unto the tomb; and stooping over, he seeth the linen cloths by themselves;
and he departed to his home, wondering at what was come to pass.
13 And lo, two of them were going that very day to a village called
Emmaus, which was threescore furlongs from Jerusalem. 14 And THEY
communed with each other of all these things which had happened. 15 And
it came to pass, while they communed and questioned together, that Jesus
himself drew near, and went with them. 16 But their :eyes were holden that
they should not know him. 17 And he said unto them, What :words are
these that ye exchange one with another, as ye walk? And they stood still,
sad-faced. 18 And one Cleopas by name, answering said unto him, Dost
thou alone sojourn in Jerusalem and not know the things :come to pass
therein in these :days? 19 And he said to them, What things? And they said
to him, Those concerning Jesus the Nazarene, who was a [man] prophet,
mighty in deed and word before :God and all the people: 20 and how the
chief priests and our :rulers delivered him unto sentence of death, and
crucified him. 21 But we hoped that he it was who should redeem :Israel.
Yea and besides all this, it is now the third day since these things came to
pass. 22 Moreover certain women of ours amazed us, having been early at
the tomb; 23 and when they found not his :body, they came, saying, they
had also seen a vision of angels, who say he is alive. 24 And certain of
those with us went to the tomb, and found it thus, just as the women had
said: but him they saw not. 25 And HE said unto them, O foolish, and slow
of :heart to believe in all that the prophets have spoken! 26 Behooved it not
the Christ to suffer these things, and to enter into his :glory? 27 And
beginning from Moses and from all the prophets, he interpreted to them in
all the scriptures the things concerning himself. 28 And they drew nigh unto
the village, whither they were going: and HE made as though he would go
further. 29 And they urged him, saying, Abide with us; for it is toward
evening, and the day is now far spent. And he went in :to abide with them.
30 And it came to pass, when he had sat down with them to meat, he took
the loaf and blessed; and breaking it he gave to them. 31 And their :eyes
were opened, and they knew him; and HE vanished out of their sight. 32 And
they said one unto another, Was not our :heart burning, while he spake to
us in the way, as he opened to us the scriptures? 33 And they rose up
that very hour, and returned to Jerusalem, and found the eleven collected
together, and those with them, 34 saying [that], The Lord is risen indeed,
and hath appeared to Simon. 35 And THEY rehearsed the happenings on
the way, and how he was known of them in the breaking of the bread.
36 And as they spake these things, he himself stood in their midst, and saith
unto them, Peace to you. 37 But they, terrified and becoming affrighted,
supposed they beheld a spirit. 38 And he said to them, Why are ye troubled?
and wherefore do questionings arise in your :heart? 39 See my :hands and
my :feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; because a spirit hath not
flesh and bones, as ye behold me having. 40 And when he had said this, he
showed them his :hands and :feet. 41 And while they still disbelieved for :joy,
and wondered, he said to them, Have ye here aught to eat? 42 And they
gave him a piece of a broiled fish. 43 And he took it, and ate before them.
44 And he said unto them, These are my :words which I spake unto you,
while I was yet with you, that all the things written in the law of Moses, and
the Prophets, and the Psalms, concerning me must be fulfilled. 45 Then
opened he their :mind to understand the scriptures: 46 and he said to them
[that], Thus it is written, that the Christ should suffer, and rise from the dead
the third day; 47 and that repentance unto remission of sins be preached in
his :name unto all the nations, beginning from Jerusalem. 48 Ye are
witnesses of these things. 49 And lo, I send forth the promise of my :Father
upon you: but tarry YE in the city, until ye be clothed with power from on
high.
50 And he led them out until over against Bethany: and he lifted up
his :hands, and blessed them. 51 And it came to pass, while he :blessed
them, he parted from them, and was carried up into :heaven. 52 And THEY
worshipped him, and returned to Jerusalem with great joy: 53 and were
continually in the temple, blessing :God.

ACCORDING TO JOHN

Chapter 1
1 IN the beginning the Word was, and the Word was with :God, and the
Word was God. 2 The same was in the beginning with :God. 3 All
things became through him; and without him nothing became that had
become. 4 In him was life; and the life was the light of :men. 5 And the light
shineth in the darkness; and the darkness apprehended it not. 6 There
came to be a man, sent from God, his name was John. 7 The same came
for a witness, that he might witness of the light, that all might believe through
him. 8 HE was not the light, but came that he might witness of the light.
9 The true :light was which coming into the world lighteth every man. 10 He
was in the world, and the world became through him, and the world knew
him not. 11 He came unto his :own possessions, and his :own received him
not. 12 But as many as received him, to them gave he authority to become
children of God, even to them that believe unto his :name: 13 who were
begotten, not of bloods, nor of the will of flesh, nor of man’s will, but of God.
14 And the Word became flesh, and tabernacled among us, and we beheld
his :glory, glory as of an only begotten with a father, full of grace and truth.
15 (John witnesseth of him, and cried, saying,—this was he who said—Who
cometh after me is become before me: for he was first in regard of me.)
16 Because of his :fulness we all received, and grace upon grace.
17 Because the law was given through Moses; the grace and the truth came
to be through Jesus Christ. 18 God no one hath ever seen; an only begotten,
himself God, who is unto the bosom of the Father, HE hath declared him.
19 And this is the witness of :John, when the Jews sent unto him from
Jerusalem priests and Levites to ask him, Who art THOU? 20 And he
confessed and denied not; and he confessed [that], I am not the Christ.
21 And they asked him, What then art thou? Art thou Elijah? And he saith,
I am not. Art THOU the prophet? And he answered, No. 22 They said
therefore to him, Who art thou? that we may give answer to them that sent
us. What sayest thou of thyself? 23 He said, I am a voice of one crying in
the wilderness, Make straight the way of the Lord, as said Isaiah the prophet.
24 And they had been sent from the Pharisees. 25 And they asked him, and
said to him, Why then baptizest thou, if THOU art not the Christ, nor Elijah,
nor the prophet? 26 :John answered them, saying, I baptize in water: in the
midst of you standeth one whom ye know not, 27 who cometh after me, the
latchet of whose shoe I am not worthy to unloose. 28 These things came to
pass in Bethany beyond the Jordan, where :John was baptizing. 29 On
the morrow he seeth :Jesus coming unto him, and saith, See, the lamb
of :God, that taketh away the sin of the world! 30 This is he of whom I said,
After me cometh a man who is become before me: for he was first in regard
of me. 31 And I knew him not; but that he be manifested to :Israel, for this
came I baptizing in water. 32 And John witnessed, saying [that], I have
beheld the Spirit descending as a dove out of heaven; and he abode upon
him. 33 And I knew him not: but who sent me to baptize in water, HE said to
me, Upon whomsoever thou shalt see the Spirit descending and abiding
upon him, the same is he that baptizeth in the Holy Spirit. 34 And I have
seen, and have witnessed that this is the Son of :God.
35 Again on the morrow John was standing, and two of his disciples;
36 and he looked upon :Jesus as he walked, and saith, See, the Lamb
of :God! 37 And the two :disciples heard him speak and followed :Jesus.
38 And :Jesus turned, and beheld them following, and saith to them, What
seek ye? And they said to him, Rabbei (which is to say, interpreted,
Teacher), where abidest thou? 39 He saith to them, Come, and ye shall see.
They came therefore and saw where he abode; and they abode with him
that :day: the hour was about the tenth. 40 One of the two that heard it from
John and followed him, was Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter. 41 HE
findeth first his :own :brother Simon, and saith to him, We have found the
Messiah (which is, interpreted, Christ). 42 He brought him
unto :Jesus. :Jesus looked at him, and said, Thou art Simon the son of
John: thou shalt be called Cephas (which is, by interpretation, Peter).
43 On the morrow he wished to go forth into :Galilee, and he findeth Philip:
and :Jesus saith to him, Follow me. 44 Now :Philip was from Bethsaida, of
the city of Andrew and Peter. 45 Philip findeth :Nathanael, and saith to him,
We have found him, of whom wrote Moses in the law, and the prophets,
Jesus the one of Nazareth, son of :Joseph. 46 And Nathanael said to him,
Can aught good come out of Nazareth? :Philip saith to him, Come and see.
47 Jesus saw Nathanael coming unto him, and saith of him, See, an Israelite
indeed, in whom is no guile! 48 Nathanael saith to him, Whence knowest
thou me? Jesus answered and said to him, Before Philip called thee, when
thou wast under the fig tree, I saw thee. 49 Nathanael answered him,
Rabbei, THOU art the Son of :God; THOU art King of :Israel. 50 :Jesus
answered and said to him, Because I said to thee that I saw thee
underneath the fig tree, believest thou? thou shalt see greater things than
these. 51 And he saith to him, Amen, Amen, I say unto you, Ye shall see the
heaven opened, and the angels of :God ascending and descending upon
the Son of :man.

Chapter 2
1 And the third :day there was a marriage in Cana of :Galilee; and the
mother of :Jesus was there: 2 and :Jesus also was bidden, and
his :disciples, to the marriage. 3 And when the wine failed, the mother
of :Jesus saith unto him, They have no wine. 4 And :Jesus saith to her,
Woman, what have I to do with thee? mine :hour is not yet come.
5 His :mother saith to the servants, Whatever he saith to you, do. 6 Now six
waterpots of stone were set there according to the purifying of the Jews,
containing two or three firkins apiece. 7 Saith :Jesus to them, Fill the
waterpots with water. And they filled them up to the brim. 8 And he saith to
them, Draw out now, and bear to the feast ruler. And they brought it. 9 And
when the feast-ruler tasted the water become wine, and knew not whence it
was (but the servants that had drawn the water knew), the feast-ruler calleth
the bridegroom, 10 and saith to him, Every man setteth on the good wine
first; and when they have drunk freely, then the inferior: THOU till now hast
kept the good wine. 11 This beginning of :signs did :Jesus in Cana
of :Galilee, and manifested his :glory; and his disciples believed on him.
12 After this he went down to Capernaum, he, and his :mother, and
the brethren, and his :disciples; and there they abode not many days.
13 And the passover of the Jews was nigh, and :Jesus went up to
Jerusalem. 14 And he found in the temple those that sold oxen and sheep
and doves, and the money changers sitting: 15 and he made a scourge of
cords, and cast all out of the temple, both the sheep and the oxen; and he
poured out the money of the changers, and overthrew their tables; 16 and to
the :dove-sellers he said, Take these hence; make not the house of
my :Father a house of merchandise. 17 His :disciples remembered that it is
written, The zeal for thy :house is devouring me. 18 The Jews therefore
answered and said to him, What sign showest thou us, because thou doest
these things? 19 Jesus answered and said to them, Destroy this :sanctuary,
and in three days I will raise it up. 20 The Jews therefore said, Forty and six
years was this :sanctuary in building, and wilt THOU raise it up in three days?
21 But HE spake of the sanctuary of his :body. 22 When therefore he was
raised from the dead, his :disciples remembered that he said this, and
believed the scripture, and the word which :Jesus had said.
23 Now when he was in :Jerusalem at the passover, during the feast,
many believed unto his :name, beholding his :signs which he did. 24 But
Jesus himself did not trust himself to them, for that he knew all men, 25 and
because he had no need that any one bear witness concerning :man; for
himself knew what was in :man.

Chapter 3
1 Now there was a man of the Pharisees, Nicodemus his name, a
ruler of the Jews: 2 the same came unto him by night, and said to him,
Rabbei, we know that thou art a teacher come from God; for no one can do
these :signs which thou doest, except :God be with him. 3 Jesus answered
and said to him, Amen, Amen, I say unto thee, Except one be born from
above, he cannot see the kingdom of :God. 4 :Nicodemus saith unto him,
How can a man be born being an old man? can he enter a second time into
the womb of his :mother, and be born? 5 :Jesus answered, Amen, Amen, I
say unto thee, Except one be born of water and Spirit, he cannot enter into
the kingdom of :God. 6 What is born of the flesh is flesh; and what is born of
the Spirit is spirit. 7 Marvel not that I said to thee, Ye must be born from
above. 8 The Spirit breatheth where he willeth, and thou hearest his :voice,
but knowest not whence he cometh, and whither he goeth: so is every
one :born of the Spirit. 9 Nicodemus answered and said to him, How can
these things be? 10 Jesus answered and said to him, Art thou the teacher
of :Israel, and understandest not these things? 11 Amen, Amen, I say unto
thee [that], We speak what we know, and witness what we have seen; and
ye receive not our :witness. 12 If I told you the earthly things and ye believe
not, how shall ye believe if I tell you :heavenly? 13 And no one hath
ascended into the heaven, except he that descended out of the heaven, the
Son of :man. 14 And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so
must the Son of :man be lifted up; 15 that whosoever believeth have in him
eternal life. 16 For :God so loved the world, that he gave his :only
begotten :Son, that whosoever believeth unto him perish not, but have
eternal life. 17 For :God sent not the Son into the world to judge the world;
but that the world be saved through him. 18 Who believeth unto him is not
judged: who believeth not hath been judged already, because he hath not
believed unto the name of the only begotten Son of :God. 19 And this is the
judgment, that the light is come into the world, and :men loved the darkness
rather than the light; for their :works were evil. 20 For every one that
practiseth evil things hateth the light, and cometh not unto the light, that
his :works be not reproved. 21 But who doeth the truth cometh unto the light,
that his :works be manifested that they have been wrought in God.
22 After these things came :Jesus and his :disciples into the land of
Judæa, and there tarried with them, and baptized. 23 And :John also was
baptizing in Ænōn near :Saleim, because many waters were there: and they
came, and were baptized. 24 For John was not yet cast into :prison. 25 A
dispute therefore arose by the disciples of John with a Jew about purifying.
26 And they came unto :John, and said to him, Rabbei: who was with thee
beyond the Jordan, to whom THOU hast witnessed, see, HE baptizeth, and
all come unto him. 27 John answered and said, A man can receive nothing,
except it have been given him from :heaven. 28 YE yourselves bear me
witness, that I said, The Christ I am not, but, that I am sent before him.
29 Who hath the bride is the bridegroom: but the friend of the bridegroom,
that standeth and heareth him, joyeth in joy because of the voice of the
bridegroom: this my :joy therefore is made full. 30 He must increase, but I
must decrease. 31 Who cometh from above is above all: who from the
earth is, from the earth he is and from the earth he speaketh: who cometh
from :heaven is above all. 32 What he hath seen and heard, of this he
witnesseth: and no one receiveth his :witness. 33 Who hath received
his :witness hath set his seal to this, that :God is true. 34 For he whom :God
hath sent speaketh the words of :God: for not by measure giveth he the
Spirit. 35 The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his :hand.
36 Who believeth unto the Son hath eternal life; but who disobeyeth the Son
shall not see life, but the wrath of :God abideth on him.

Chapter 4
1 When therefore the Lord knew that the Pharisees had heard that
Jesus was making and baptizing more disciples than John 2 (although
Jesus himself baptized not, but his :disciples), 3 he left :Judæa, and
departed again into :Galilee. 4 And he had to pass through :Samaria. 5 He
cometh therefore to a city of :Samaria, called Sychar, near the enclosure
that Jacob gave to his :son :Joseph: 6 and :Jacob’s spring was
there. :Jesus therefore, wearied with the journey, was sitting thus by the
spring; the hour was about the sixth. 7 A woman of :Samaria cometh to
draw water: :Jesus saith to her, Give me to drink. 8 For his :disciples were
gone away into the city to buy food. 9 Saith therefore the
Samaritan :woman to him, How askest THOU, being a Jew, drink of me, who
am a Samaritan woman? (For Jews have no dealings with Samaritans.)
10 Jesus answered and said to her, If thou knewest the gift of :God, and who
it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink; thou wouldest have asked of him,
and he would have given thee living water. 11 She saith to him, Sir, thou
hast no pail, and the well is deep: whence then hast thou the living :water?
12 Art thou greater than our :father Jacob, who gave us the well, and drank
thereof himself, and his :sons, and his :cattle? 13 Jesus answered and said
to her, Every one that drinketh of this :water shall thirst again: 14 but whoso
drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst; but the water that
I shall give him shall become in him a spring of water leaping up unto eternal
life. 15 The woman saith unto him, Sir, give me this :water, that I thirst not,
neither come all the way hither to draw. 16 He saith to her, Go, call
thy :husband, and come hither. 17 The woman answered and said to him, I
have no husband. :Jesus saith to her, Thou saidst well [that] I have no
husband: 18 for thou hast had five husbands, and he whom thou now hast is
not thy husband: this hast thou spoken truly. 19 The woman saith to him, Sir,
I perceive that thou art a prophet. 20 Our :fathers worshipped in
this :mountain; and YE say, that in Jerusalem is the place where men ought
to worship. 21 :Jesus saith to her, Believe me, woman, that an hour cometh,
when neither in this :mountain, nor in Jerusalem, shall ye worship the
Father. 22 YE worship ye know not what: WE worship what we know;
for :salvation is from the Jews. 23 But an hour cometh, and now is, when the
true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth: for even such
the Father seeketh as his :worshippers. 24 :God is Spirit: and who worship
him must worship in spirit and truth. 25 The woman saith to him, I know that
Messiah cometh that is called Christ: when HE is come, he will declare to us
all things. 26 :Jesus saith to her, I that speak to thee am he. 27 And
upon this came his :disciples; and marvelled that he was speaking with a
woman; yet no one said, What seekest thou? or, Why speakest thou with
her? 28 So the woman left her :waterpot, and went away into the city, and
saith to the men, 29 Come, see a man, who told me all things that I did: can
this be the Christ? 30 They went out of the city, and were coming unto him.
31 In the mean while the disciples asked him, saying, Rabbei, eat. 32 But he
said to them, I have meat to eat that YE know not. 33 The disciples therefore
said one to another, Hath any one brought him aught to eat? 34 :Jesus saith
to them, My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to accomplish
his :work. 35 Say not YE that there are yet four months, and then cometh the
harvest? lo, I say unto you, Lift up your :eyes, and look on the fields, that
they are white unto harvest. 36 Already who reapeth receiveth reward, and
gathereth fruit unto life eternal; that who soweth and who reapeth may
rejoice together. 37 For herein is the saying true that one is who soweth,
and another who reapeth. 38 I sent you to reap that whereon ye have not
labored: others have labored, and ye are entered into their :labor. 39
And from that :city many of the Samaritans believed unto him because of
the word of the woman, who witnessed [that], He told me all things that I did.
40 When therefore the Samaritans came unto him, they asked him to abide
with them: and he abode there two days. 41 And many more believed
because of his :word; 42 and they said to the woman [that], Now we believe,
not because of thy :speaking: for we have heard for ourselves, and know
that this is truly the Savior of the world.
43 And after the two days he went forth from thence into :Galilee.
44 For Jesus himself testified, that a prophet hath no honor in his
own :country. 45 When therefore he came into :Galilee, the Galilæans
received him, having seen all the things that he did in Jerusalem at the feast:
for they also went unto the feast. 46 He came therefore again
unto :Cana of :Galilee, where he made the water wine. And there was a
certain nobleman, whose :son was sick at Capernaum. 47 This man heard
that Jesus was come out of :Judæa into :Galilee, and he went unto him, and
asked that he come down, and heal his :son; for he was at death’s point.
48 :Jesus therefore said unto him, Except ye see signs and wonders, ye will
in nowise believe. 49 The nobleman saith unto him, Sir, come down ere my
little :child die. 50 :Jesus saith to him, Go, thy :son liveth. The man believed
the word that :Jesus spake to him, and he went away. 51 But as he was
already going down, his :bondmen met him, saying, that his :boy lived.
52 He inquired therefore of them the hour when he began to amend. They
said therefore to him [that], Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him.
53 The father therefore knew that it was at that :hour in which :Jesus said
unto him, Thy :son liveth: and himself believed, and his whole :house.
54 Now this is again a second sign that :Jesus did coming out of Judæa
into :Galilee.

Chapter 5
1 After these things was a feast of the Jews; and Jesus went up to
Jerusalem.
2 Now there is in :Jerusalem by the sheep gate a pool, the one called
in Hebrew Bēthzatha, having five porches. 3 In these lay a multitude of the
sick, blind, halt, withered. 5 And a certain man was there who had been
thirty and eight years in his :infirmity. 6 :Jesus seeing this man lying down,
and knowing that he had been thus already a long time, saith to him,
Wouldest thou be made whole? 7 The sick man answered him, Sir, I have
no man, when the water is troubled, to put me into the pool: but while I am
coming, another steppeth down before me. 8 :Jesus saith to him, Arise,
take up thy :bed, and walk. 9 And straightway the man became whole, and
took up his :bed and walked. Now it was the sabbath on that :day.
10 Said the Jews therefore to the one cured, It is the sabbath, and it is not
lawful for thee to take up the bed. 11 But he answered them, He who made
me whole, the same said to me, Take up thy :bed, and walk. 12 They asked
him, Who is the man that said to thee, Take up, and walk? 13 But the one
healed knew not who it was; for :Jesus disappeared, a crowd being in the
place. 14 After these things :Jesus findeth him in the temple, and said to
him, Behold, thou art become whole: sin no more, lest aught worse befall
thee. 15 The man went away, and told the Jews that it was Jesus who had
made him whole. 16 And for this the Jews persecuted :Jesus, because he
did these things on a sabbath. 17 But he answered them, My :Father
worketh even until now, and I work. 18 For this therefore the Jews sought
the more to kill him, because he not only brake the sabbath, but also
said :God was his own Father, making himself equal with :God. 19 :Jesus
therefore answered and said to them, Amen, Amen, I say unto you, The Son
can do nothing of himself, but what he seeth the Father doing: for whatever
things HE doeth, these the Son also doeth likewise. 20 For the Father loveth
the Son, and showeth him all things that himself doeth: and greater works
than these will he show him, that YE may marvel. 21 For just as the Father
raiseth the dead and maketh alive, thus the Son also maketh alive whom he
will. 22 For neither doth the Father judge any one, but hath given
all :judgment to the Son; 23 that all may honor the Son, even as they honor
the Father. Who honoreth not the Son honoreth not the Father that sent him.
24 Amen, Amen, I say unto you [that], Who heareth my :word, and believeth
him that sent me, hath eternal life, and cometh not into judgment, but hath
passed out of :death into :life. 25 Amen, Amen, I say unto you, that an hour
cometh, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of :God,
and who hear shall live. 26 For just as the Father hath life in himself, thus
gave he to the Son also to have life in himself:
27 and he gave him authority to pass judgment, because he is Son of man.
28 Marvel not at this: for the hour cometh, in which all they in the tombs shall
hear his :voice, 29 and shall come forth; who have done the good things,
unto resurrection of life; who have practised the evil things, unto
resurrection of judgment. 30 I can of myself do nothing: as I hear, I judge:
and :my judgment is righteous; because I seek not MY :will, but the will of
him that sent me. 31 If I witness of myself, my :witness is not true. 32 It
is another that witnesseth of me; and I know that the witness which he
witnesseth of me is true. 33 Ye have sent unto John, and he hath witnessed
to the truth. 34 But I receive not the witness from man: however, I say these
things, that YE be saved. 35 HE was the burning and shining :lamp; and YE
were willing to rejoice for an hour in his :light. 36 But the witness I have is
greater than :John’s; for the works which the Father hath given me to
accomplish, the very works that I do, witness of me, that the Father hath
sent me. 37 And the Father that sent me, HE hath borne witness of me. Ye
have neither ever heard his voice, nor seen his form. 38 And ye have not
his :word abiding in you: for whom HE sent, him YE believe not. 39 Search
the scriptures, because YE think that in them ye have eternal life; and THEY
are which witness of me; 40 and ye will not to come to me, that ye may have
life. 41 I receive not glory from men. 42 But I know you, that ye have not the
love of :God in yourselves. 43 I am come in the name of my :Father, and ye
receive me not: if another shall come in :his own :name, him ye will receive.
44 How can YE believe, receiving glory one of another, and the glory :from
the only God ye seek not? 45 Think not that I will accuse you to the Father:
there is your :accuser, Moses, on whom ye have set your hope. 46 For if ye
believed Moses, ye would believe me; for HE wrote of me. 47 But if ye
believe not HIS writings, how shall ye believe my :words?

Chapter 6
1 After these things :Jesus went away to the other side of the sea
of :Galilee, of :Tiberias. 2 And a great crowd followed him, because they
beheld the signs which he did over the sick. 3 And Jesus went up into the
mountain, and there he sat with his :disciples. 4 Now the passover, the
feast of the Jews, was nigh. 5 :Jesus therefore lifting up his :eyes, and
beholding that a great crowd cometh unto him, saith unto Philip, Whence
are we to buy loaves, that these may eat? 6 And this he said to prove him:
for he himself knew what he would do. 7 Philip answered him, Two hundred
shillings’ worth of loaves suffice not them, that each take a little. 8 One of
his :disciples, Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, saith to him, 9 A lad is
here, who hath five barley loaves, and two fishes: but what are these among
so many? 10 :Jesus said, Make the men sit down. Now much grass was in
the place. The men therefore sat down, in :number about five thousand.
11 :Jesus therefore took the loaves, and having given thanks, he distributed
to those sitting down; likewise also of the fishes as much as they would.
12 And when they were filled, he saith to his :disciples, Gather up the
fragments remaining over, that nothing be lost. 13 So they gathered up and
filled from the five :barley loaves twelve baskets of fragments, which
remained over to them that had eaten. 14 The men, therefore, seeing
what signs he did, said [that], This is truly the prophet that cometh into the
world. 15 Jesus therefore perceiving that they were about to come and take
him by force, to make him king, withdrew again into the mountain himself
alone. 16 And when evening came, his :disciples went down unto the
sea; 17 and they entered into a boat, and were going over the sea unto
Capernaum. And it was now dark, and :Jesus had not yet come unto them.
18 And the sea was rising with a great wind blowing. 19 When therefore they
had rowed about five and twenty or thirty furlongs, they behold :Jesus
walking on the sea, and drawing near the boat: and they were afraid. 20 But
he saith to them, It is I; be not afraid. 21 They were willing therefore to
receive him into the boat: and straightway the boat was at the land whither
they were going.
22 On the morrow the crowd that stood on the other side of the sea
saw that no other little boat was there, save one, and that :Jesus entered
not with his disciples into the boat, but that his :disciples went away alone;
23 but boats came from Tiberias near the place where they ate the bread
after the Lord had given thanks. 24 When the crowd therefore saw that
Jesus was not there, neither his :disciples, they themselves got into the little
boats, and came to Capernaum, seeking :Jesus. 25 And when they found
him on the other side of the sea, they said to him, Rabbei, when camest
thou hither? 26 :Jesus answered them and said, Amen, Amen, I say unto
you, Ye seek me, not because ye saw signs, but because ye were eating of
the loaves, and were filled. 27 Work not for the food which perisheth, but for
the food which abideth unto eternal life, which the Son of :man shall give
you: for him the Father, :God, hath sealed. 28 They said therefore unto him,
What must we do, that we may work the works of :God? 29 :Jesus
answered and said to them, This is the work of :God, that ye believe on him
whom HE hath sent. 30 They said therefore to him, What then doest THOU
for a sign, that we may see, and believe thee? what workest thou? 31 Our
fathers ate the manna in the wilderness; even as it is written, He gave them
bread out of :heaven to eat. 32 :Jesus therefore said to them, Amen, Amen,
I say unto you, Not Moses gave you the bread out of :heaven; but
my :Father giveth you the true :bread out of :heaven. 33 For the bread
of :God is he that cometh down out of :heaven, and giveth life to the world.
34 They said therefore unto him, Lord, evermore give us this :bread.
35 :Jesus said to them, I am the bread of :life: who cometh unto me shall in
nowise hunger, and who believeth unto me shall in nowise ever thirst.
36 But I said to you, that both ye have seen me and believe not.
37 Everything that the Father giveth me shall come unto me; and him that
cometh unto me I will in nowise cast out; 38 because I am come down
from :heaven, not to do :my :will, but the will of him that sent me. 39 And this
is the will of him that sent me, that of everything which he hath given me I
should lose nothing, but should raise it up at the last day. 40 For this is the
will of my :Father, that every one that beholdeth the Son, and believeth unto
him, have eternal life; and I will raise him up at the last day. 41 The
Jews therefore murmured concerning him, because he said, I am the bread
which came down out of :heaven. 42 And they said, Is not this Jesus, the
son of Joseph, whose :father and mother WE know? how saith he now [that]
I am come down out of :heaven? 43 Jesus answered and said to them,
Murmur not among yourselves. 44 No one can come unto me, except the
Father that sent me draw him: and I will raise him up in the last day. 45 It is
written in the prophets, And all shall be taught of God. Every one that hath
heard from the Father, and hath learned, cometh unto me. 46 Not that any
one hath seen the Father, save he that is from :God, HE hath seen the
Father. 47 Amen, Amen, I say unto you, Who believeth hath eternal life.
48 I am the bread of :life. 49 Your :fathers ate the manna in the wilderness,
and died. 50 This is the bread which cometh down out of :heaven, that one
eat thereof, and not die. 51 I am the living :bread which came down out
of :heaven: if any eat of :this :bread, he shall live for ever: yea and the bread
which I will give is my flesh, for the life of the world. 52 The Jews
therefore strove one with another, saying, How can this man give us
his :flesh to eat? 53 :Jesus therefore said to them, Amen, Amen, I say unto
you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of :man and drink his :blood, ye have
not life in yourselves. 54 Who feedeth on my :flesh and drinketh my :blood
hath eternal life; and I will raise him up at the last day. 55 For my :flesh is
true meat, and my :blood is true drink. 56 Who feedeth on my :flesh and
drinketh my :blood abideth in me, and I in him. 57 As the living Father sent
me, and I live because of the Father; so who feeds on me, HE also shall live
because of me. 58 This is the bread which came down out of :heaven: not
as the fathers ate, and died; he that feeds on this :bread shall live for ever.
59 These things said he in a synagogue, as he taught in Capernaum.
60 Many therefore of his :disciples, when they heard this, said, This :saying
is hard: who can hear it? 61 But :Jesus knowing in himself that his :disciples
murmured at this said to them, Doth this stumble you? 62 What then if ye
should behold the Son of :man ascending where he was before? 63 It is the
Spirit that maketh alive; the flesh profiteth nothing: the words that I have
spoken to you are spirit, and are life. 64 But there are some of you that
believe not. For :Jesus knew from the beginning who they were that
believed not, and who it was that should deliver him up. 65 And he said, For
this cause have I said to you, that no one can come unto me, except it be
given unto him of the Father.
66 Upon this many of his :disciples went :back, and walked no more with him.
67 :Jesus said therefore to the twelve, Would ye also go away? 68 Simon
Peter answered him, Lord, unto whom shall we go? thou hast the words of
eternal life. 69 And WE have believed and know that THOU art the Holy One
of :God. 70 :Jesus answered them, Did not I choose you the twelve, and
one of you is a devil? 71 Now he spake of :Judas son of Simon Iscariot, for
he it was that should deliver him up, one of the twelve.

Chapter 7
1 And after these things :Jesus walked in :Galilee: for he would not
walk in :Judæa, because the Jews sought to kill him. 2 Now the feast of the
Jews, the feast of tabernacles, was nigh. 3 His :brethren therefore said unto
him, Depart hence, and go into :Judæa, that thy :disciples also shall behold
thy :works which thou doest. 4 For no one doeth aught in secret, and
himself seeketh to be known openly. If thou doest these things, manifest
thyself to the world. 5 For even his :brethren did not believe unto him.
6 :Jesus therefore saith to them, :My :season is not yet come; but
your :season is always ready. 7 The world cannot hate you; but me it hateth,
because I witness of it, that its :works are evil. 8 Go YE up unto the feast: I
go not up yet unto this :feast; because :my :season is not yet fulfilled. 9 And
having said these things to them, he remained in :Galilee. 10 But when
his :brethren were gone up unto the feast, then he himself also went up, not
openly, but as if in secret. 11 The Jews therefore sought him at the feast,
and said, Where is that man? 12 And much murmuring was among the
crowds concerning him: some said [that], He is a good man; but others said,
No, but he leadeth the multitude astray. 13 Yet no one spake openly of him
for the fear of the Jews.
14 But when it was now the midst of the feast Jesus went up into the
temple, and taught. 15 The Jews therefore marvelled, saying, How knoweth
this man letters, not having learned? 16 Jesus therefore answered them,
and said, My :teaching is not mine, but his that sent me. 17 If any willeth to
do his :will, he shall know of the teaching, whether it is of :God, or whether I
speak from myself. 18 Who speaketh from himself seeketh his :own :glory:
but who seeketh the glory of him that sent him, the same is true, and no
unrighteousness is in him. 19 Did not Moses give you the law, and none of
you doeth the law? Why seek ye to kill me? 20 The crowd answered, Thou
hast a demon: who seeketh to kill thee? 21 Jesus answered and said to
them, I did one work, and ye all marvel. 22 Therefore Moses hath given
you :circumcision (not that it is of :Moses but of the fathers); and on a
sabbath ye circumcise a man. 23 If the man receiveth circumcision on a
sabbath, that the law of Moses be not broken; are ye wroth with me,
because I made a man every whit whole on a sabbath? 24 Judge not
according to appearance, but judge :righteous judgment. 25 Some
therefore of them of Jerusalem said, Is not this he whom they seek to kill?
26 And behold, he speaketh openly, and they say nothing to him. Can it be
that the rulers verily know that this is the Christ? 27 But we know this man
whence he is: but when the Christ cometh, no one knoweth whence he is.
28 :Jesus therefore cried, teaching in the temple and saying, Ye both know
me, and know whence I am; and I am not come of myself, but who sent me
is true, whom ye know not. 29 I know him; because I am from him, and HE
sent me. 30 They sought therefore to take him: and no one laid :hand on
him, because his :hour was not yet come. 31 But of the crowd many
believed unto him and said, When the Christ shall come, will he do more
signs than what this man hath done? 32 The Pharisees heard the crowd
murmuring these things concerning him; and the chief priests and the
Pharisees sent officers to take him. 33 :Jesus therefore said, Yet a little time
am I with you, and I go unto him that sent me. 34 Ye shall seek me, and
shall not find me: and where I am, YE cannot come. 35 The Jews therefore
said among themselves, Whither will this man go that WE shall not find him?
will he go unto the Dispersion among the Greeks, and teach the Greeks?
36 What is this :word that he said, Ye shall seek me, and shall not find me;
and where I am, YE cannot come?
37 Now on the last, the great day of the feast, :Jesus stood and cried,
saying, If any thirst, let him come unto me and drink. 38 Who believeth unto
me, as the scripture hath said, out of his :belly shall flow rivers of living water.
39 But this he spake of the Spirit, which they that believed unto him were to
receive: for the Spirit was not yet; because Jesus was not yet glorified.
40 Some of the crowd therefore, when they heard these :words, said that
this is truly the prophet. 41 Others said, This is the Christ. But some said,
What, doth the Christ come out of :Galilee? 42 Did not the scripture say that
the Christ cometh of the seed of David, and from Bethlehem, the village
where David was? 43 A division therefore arose in the crowd because of
him. 44 And some of them would have taken him; but no one laid :hands on
him. 45 The officers therefore came to the chief priests and Pharisees;
and these said to them, Why did ye not bring him? 46 The officers answered,
Never man so spake. 47 The Pharisees therefore answered them, Are ye
also deceived? 48 Hath any of the rulers believed unto him, or of the
Pharisees? 49 But this :crowd that knoweth not the law are accursed.
50 Nicodemus saith to them (he that came unto him before, being one of
them), 51 Doth our :law judge the man, except it first hear from him and
know what he doeth? 52 They answered and said to him, Art THOU also
of :Galilee? Search, and see that out of :Galilee ariseth no prophet.
53 And they went each unto his :house:

Chapter 8
1 but Jesus went unto the mount of :Olives. 2 And early in the morning he
came into the temple, and the whole people came unto him; and he sat
down, and taught them. 3 And the scribes and the Pharisees bring a
woman taken in sin; and having set her in the midst, 4 they say to him,
Teacher, this :woman hath been taken in adultery, in the very act. 5 Now in
the law Moses commanded us to stone :such: what then sayest THOU?
6 And this they said, trying him, that they might have whereof to accuse him.
But :Jesus stooped down, and with his finger wrote on the ground. 7 But
when they continued asking him, he lifted himself up, and said to them, Who
is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her. 8 And again he
stooped down, and wrote on the ground. 9 And they, when they heard it,
went out one by one, beginning from the elders: and he was left alone, and
the woman, where she was, in the midst. 10 And :Jesus lifted himself up,
and said to her, Woman, where are they? did no one condemn thee?
11 And she said, No one, Lord. And :Jesus said, Neither do I condemn thee:
go; from now on sin no more.
12 Again therefore :Jesus spake to them, saying, I am the light of the
world: who followeth me shall in no wise walk in the darkness, but shall have
the light of :life. 13 The Pharisees therefore said to him, THOU art witnessing
of thyself; thy :witness is not true. 14 Jesus answered and said to them, And
even if I am witnessing of myself, my :witness is true; for I know whence I
came, and whither I go; but YE know not whence I come, or whither I go.
15 YE judge after the flesh; I judge no one. 16 Yea and if I
judge, :my :judgment is true; for I am not alone, but I and the Father that
sent me. 17 Yea and in :your :law it is written, that the witness of two men is
true. 18 I am he that witnesseth of myself, and the Father that sent me
witnesseth of me. 19 They said therefore to him, Where is thy :Father?
Jesus answered, Ye know neither me, nor my :Father: if ye knew me, ye
would know my :Father also. 20 These :words spake he in the treasury,
while teaching in the temple: and no one took him; because his :hour was
not yet come.
21 He said therefore again to them, I go, and ye shall seek me, and
shall die in your :sin: whither I go, YE cannot come. 22 The Jews therefore
said, Will he kill himself, that he saith, Whither I go, YE cannot come?
23 And he said to them, YE are from :beneath; I am from :above: YE are of
this :world; I am not of this :world. 24 I said therefore to you, that ye shall die
in your sins: for except ye believe that I am he, ye shall die in your :sins.
25 They said therefore to him, Who art THOU? :Jesus said unto them, Even
what I also speak to you from the beginning. 26 I have many things to speak
and to judge concerning you: but who sent me is true; and the things I heard
from him, these speak I unto the world. 27 They perceived not that he spake
to them of the Father. 28 :Jesus therefore said, When ye shall lift up the Son
of man, then shall ye know that I am he, and I do nothing of myself, but even
as the Father taught me, these I speak. 29 And who sent me is with me; he
hath not left me alone; for I do always the things pleasing to him. 30 As he
spake these things, many believed unto him. 31 :Jesus therefore said to
the Jews that had believed him, If YE abide in my :word, ye are truly my
disciples; 32 and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall set you free.
33 They answered unto him, We are Abraham’s seed, and have never yet
been in bondage to any one: how sayest THOU [that] Ye shall become free.
34 :Jesus answered them, Amen, Amen, I say unto you [that], Every one
that doeth :sin is bondman of :sin. 35 And the bondman abideth not in the
house for ever: the son abideth for ever. 36 If therefore the Son shall set you
free, ye shall be free indeed. 37 I know that ye are Abraham’s seed; But ye
seek to kill me, because :my :word hath no place in you. 38 What things I
have seen with the Father I speak: ye also then do what things ye heard
from the father. 39 They answered and said to him, Our :father is
Abraham. :Jesus saith to them, If ye are :Abraham’s children, do the works
of :Abraham. 40 But now ye seek to kill me, a man who have told you the
truth, which I heard from :God: this Abraham did not. 41 YE do the works of
your :father. They said to him, WE were not born of fornication; we have one
Father, :God. 42 :Jesus said to them, If :God were your Father, ye would
love me: for I came forth and am come from :God, for neither have I come of
myself, but HE sent me. 43 Wherefore understand ye not :my :speech?
Because ye cannot hear :my :word. 44 YE are of the father, the devil, and
the lusts of your :father ye will to do. He was a man-slayer from the
beginning, and standeth not in the truth, because no truth is in him. When
he speaketh the lie, he speaketh of his :own: for he is a liar, and the father
thereof. 45 But I, because I say the truth, ye believe me not. 46 Which of
you convicteth me of sin? If I speak truth, why do YE not believe me?
47 Who is of :God heareth the words of :God: for this cause hear YE not,
because ye are not of :God. 48 The Jews answered and said to him, Say
WE not well that thou art a Samaritan, and hast a demon? 49 Jesus
answered, I have not a demon; but I honor my :Father, and YE dishonor me.
50 But I seek not my :glory: there is one that seeketh and judgeth.
51 Amen, Amen, I say unto you, If any keep my :word, he shall never see
death. 52 The Jews said to him, Now we know that thou hast a demon.
Abraham died, and the prophets; and THOU sayest, If one keep my :word,
he shall never taste of death. 53 Art THOU greater than our :father Abraham,
who died? and the prophets died: whom makest thou thyself? 54 Jesus
answered, If I glorify myself, my :glory is nothing: it is my :Father that
glorifieth me; of whom YE say, that he is your God; 55 and ye are not
acquainted with him: but I know him; and if I should say, that I know him not,
I shall be like you, a liar: but I know him, and keep his :word. 56 Your :father
Abraham rejoiced to see :my :day; and he saw and was glad. 57 The Jews
therefore said unto him, Thou art not yet fifty years old, and hast seen
Abraham? 58 Jesus said to them, Amen, Amen, I say unto you, Before
Abraham became, I am. 59 They took up stones therefore to cast at him:
but Jesus was hidden, and went out of the temple.

Chapter 9
1 And passing by, he saw a man blind from his birth. 2 And
his :disciples asked him, saying, Rabbei, who was sinning, this man, or
his :parents, that he should be born blind? 3 Jesus answered, Neither did
this man sin, nor his :parents: but that the works of :God should be
manifested in him. 4 WE must work the works of him that sent me, while it is
day: night cometh, when no one can work. 5 While I am in the world, I am
Light of the world. 6 When he had thus spoken, he spat on the ground, and
made clay of the spittle, and with the clay anointed his :eyes, 7 and said to
him, Go, wash in the pool of :Silōam (which is interpreted, Sent). He went
away therefore, and washed, and came seeing. 8 The neighbors
therefore, and they that saw him :aforetime, that he was a beggar, said, Is
not this he that sat and begged? 9 Others said [that] It is he: others said, No,
but he is like him. HE said [that], I am he. 10 They told him therefore, How
then were thine :eyes opened? 11 HE answered, The man :called Jesus
made clay, and anointed mine :eyes, and said to me [that], Go to :Silōam,
and wash: I went away therefore, and washed, and received sight. 12 And
they said to him, Where is HE? He saith, I know not. 13 They bring unto
the Pharisees the one aforetime blind. 14 Now it was the sabbath on the
day when :Jesus made the clay, and opened his :eyes. 15 Again therefore
the Pharisees also asked him how he received his sight. And he said to
them, He put clay upon mine :eyes, and I washed, and I see. 16 Some
therefore of the Pharisees said, This :man is not from God, because he
keepeth not the sabbath. But others said, How can [a man] a sinner do
such signs? And there was a division among them. 17 They say therefore
to the blind man again, What sayest THOU of him, in that he opened
thine :eyes? And he said [that], He is a prophet. 18 The Jews therefore did
not believe concerning him, that he had been blind, and had received sight,
until they called the parents of him that had received sight, 19 and asked
them, saying, Is this your :son, who ye say that he was born blind? how then
seeth he now therefore? 20 His :parents answered and said, We know that
this is our :son, and that he was born blind: 21 but how he now seeth, we
know not; or who opened his :eyes, WE know not: ask him; he is of age; HE
shall speak for himself. 22 These things said his :parents, because they
feared the Jews: for the Jews had agreed already, that if any should confess
him as Christ, he should be out of the synagogue. 23 Therefore said
his :parents [that], He is of age; ask him. 24 They called, therefore, a
second time the man that was blind, and said to him, Give glory to :God: WE
know that this :man is a sinner. 25 HE therefore answered, Whether he is a
sinner, I know not: one thing I know, that, whereas I was blind, now I see.
26 They said therefore to him, What did he to thee? how opened he
thine :eyes? 27 He answered them, I told you already, and ye did not hear;
wherefore would ye hear it again? would YE also become his disciples?
28 And they reviled him, and said, Thou art that man’s disciple; but WE are
disciples of :Moses. 29 WE know that :God hath spoken to Moses: but as for
this man, we know not whence he is. 30 The man answered and said to
them, Why, herein is the marvel, that YE know not whence he is, and he
opened mine :eyes. 31 We know that :God heareth not sinners: but if any be
worshipper of God, and do his :will, him he heareth. 32 For ages it was
unheard-of that any one opened the eyes of one born blind. 33 If this man
was not from God, he could do nothing. 34 They answered and said to him,
THOU wast altogether born in sins, and dost THOU teach us? And they cast
him out. 35 Jesus heard that they had cast him out; and found him and
said, Believest THOU unto the Son of :man? 36 HE answered and said, And
who is he, sir, that I may believe on him? 37 :Jesus said to him, Thou hast
both seen him, and he it is that speaketh with thee. 38 And he said, Lord, I
believe. And he worshipped him. 39 And :Jesus said, For judgment came I
into this :world, that who see not may see; and who see may become blind.
40 Those of the Pharisees who were with him heard these things, and said
to him, Are WE also blind? 41 :Jesus said to them, If ye were blind, ye would
have no sin: but now ye say that, We see: your :sin remaineth.

Chapter 10
1 Amen, Amen, I say unto you, Who entereth not by the door into the
fold of the sheep, but goeth up some other way, the same is a thief and
robber. 2 But who entereth by the door is shepherd of the sheep. 3 To him
the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his :voice: and he calleth his :own
sheep by name, and leadeth them out. 4 When he hath put forth all his :own,
he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his :voice.
5 And a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him: for they know not
the voice of :strangers. 6 This :proverb spake :Jesus to them: but THEY
understood not what things they were which he spake to them. 7 :Jesus
therefore said again, Amen, Amen, I say unto you, I am the door of the
sheep. 8 All that came before me are thieves and robbers: but the sheep
did not hear them. 9 I am the door; by me if any enter, he shall be saved,
and shall go in and go out, and find pasture. 10 The thief cometh not, but to
steal, and kill, and destroy: I came that they may have life, and may have
abundance. 11 I am the good :shepherd: the good :shepherd layeth down
his :life for the sheep. 12 Who is a hireling, and not a shepherd, whose own
the sheep are not, beholdeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and
fleeth (and the wolf snatcheth them, and scattereth): 13 because he is a
hireling, and careth not for the sheep. 14 I am the good :shepherd; and I
know :mine, and :mine know me, 15 even as the Father knoweth me, and I
know the Father; and I lay down my :life for the sheep. 16 And other sheep
I have, which are not of this :fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear
my :voice; and they shall become one flock, one shepherd. 17 For this the
Father loveth me, because I lay down my :life, that I take it again. 18 No one
took it away from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have authority to lay it
down, and have authority to take it again. This :commandment received I
from my :Father. 19 A division arose again among the Jews because of
these :words. 20 And many of them said, He hath a demon, and is mad;
why hear ye him? 21 Others said, These are not the sayings of a demoniac;
can a demon open the eyes of the blind?
22 The feast of dedication was then at :Jerusalem: 23 it was winter;
and :Jesus was walking in the temple in the porch of :Solomon. 24 The
Jews therefore encircled him, and said to him, How long holdest thou
our :soul in suspense? If thou art the Christ, tell us plainly. 25 :Jesus
answered them, I told you, and ye believe not: the works that I do in the
name of my :Father, these witness of me. 26 But YE believe not, because ye
are not of :my :sheep. 27 :My :sheep hear my :voice, and I know them, and
they follow me: 28 and I give them eternal life; and they shall never perish,
and no one shall snatch them out of my :hand. 29 What my :Father hath
given me is greater than all; and no one can snatch out of the hand of the
Father. 30 I and the Father are one. 31 The Jews took up stones again to
stone him. 32 :Jesus answered them, Many good works have I showed you
from the Father; for which work of those do ye stone me? 33 The Jews
answered him, For a good work we stone thee not, but for blasphemy; and
because thou, being man, makest thyself God. 34 :Jesus answered them,
Is it not written in your :law [that], I said, Ye are gods? 35 If HE called them
gods, unto whom the word of :God came (and the scripture cannot be
broken), 36 say YE of him, whom the Father sanctified and sent into the
world [that], Thou blasphemest; because I said I am :God’s Son? 37 If I do
not the works of my :Father, believe me not. 38 But if I do, though ye believe
not me, believe the works: that ye may know and understand that the Father
is in me, and I in the Father. 39 They sought therefore again to take him:
and he went forth out of their :hand.
40 And he went away again beyond the Jordan into the place where
John was baptizing at the first; and remained there. 41 And many came
unto him, and they said [that], John indeed did no sign: but all things
whatever John spake of this man were true. 42 And many believed unto him
there.

Chapter 11
1 Now a certain man was sick, Lazarus of Bethany, of the village of
Mary and her :sister Martha. 2 And it was Mariam who anointed the Lord
with ointment, and wiped his :feet with her :hair, whose :brother Lazarus
was sick. 3 The sisters therefore sent unto him, saying, Lord, see, he whom
thou lovest is sick. 4 But when :Jesus heard it, he said, This :sickness is not
unto death, but for the glory of :God, that the Son of :God be glorified by it.
5 Now :Jesus loved :Martha, and her :sister, and :Lazarus. 6 When
therefore he heard that he was sick, he then accordingly abode two days in
the place where he was. 7 Thereupon after this he saith to the disciples, Let
us go into :Judæa again. 8 The disciples say to him, Rabbei, the Jews were
but now seeking to stone thee; and goest thou thither again? 9 Jesus
answered, Are there not twelve hours in the day? If one walk in the day, he
stumbleth not, because he seeth the light of this :world. 10 But if one walk in
the night, he stumbleth, because the light is not in him. 11 These things
spake he: and after this he saith to them, Our :friend Lazarus is fallen asleep;
but I go, that I awake him. 12 The disciples therefore said to him, Lord, if he
is fallen asleep, he will recover. 13 Now :Jesus had spoken of his :death:
but THEY thought that he spake of taking :rest in :sleep. 14 Then :Jesus
therefore said to them openly, Lazarus is dead. 15 And I am glad for you
that I was not there, that ye may believe; but let us go unto him. 16 Thomas
therefore, who is called Didymus, said to his :fellow-disciples, Let US also
go, that we may die with him. 17 :Jesus therefore came and found that
he had been in the tomb four days already. 18 Now Bethany was nigh
to :Jerusalem, about fifteen furlongs off; 19 and many of the Jews had come
to :Martha and Mariam, to console them concerning their brother.
20 :Martha therefore, when she heard that Jesus was coming, met him: but
Mariam still sat in the house. 21 :Martha therefore said unto Jesus, Lord, if
thou hadst been here, my :brother had not died. 22 And now I know that,
whatever thou shalt ask of :God, :God will give thee. 23 :Jesus saith to her,
Thy :brother shall rise again. 24 :Martha saith to him, I know that he shall
rise again in the resurrection at the last day. 25 :Jesus said to her, I am the
resurrection, and the life: who believeth unto me shall live, even if he die;
26 and every one who liveth and believeth unto me shall nowise die unto the
age. Believest thou this? 27 She saith to him, Yea, Lord: I have believed
that thou art the Christ, the Son of :God, even he that cometh into the world.
28 And when she had said this, she went away, and called Mariam
her :sister secretly saying, The Teacher is here, and calleth thee. 29 And
SHE, when she heard it, arose quickly, and went unto him. 30 (Now :Jesus
was not yet come into the village, but was still in the place where :Martha
met him.) 31 The Jews then who were with her in the house, and consoling
her, when they saw :Mariam that she rose up quickly and went out, followed
her, supposing that she was going unto the tomb to wail there. 32 :Mariam
therefore, when she came where Jesus was, and saw him, fell down at
his :feet, saying to him, Lord, if thou hadst been here, my :brother had not
died. 33 When Jesus therefore saw her wailing, and the Jews also wailing
who came with her, he was indignant in spirit and troubled himself, 34 and
said, Where have ye laid him? They say to him, Lord, come and see.
35 :Jesus wept. 36 The Jews therefore said, See how he loved him! 37 But
some of them said, Could not this man, who opened the eyes of the blind
man, have done so that this man also should not die? 38 Jesus therefore
again indignant within himself cometh to the tomb. Now it was a cave, and
a stone lay against it. 39 :Jesus saith, Take ye away the stone. Martha, the
sister of the dead man, saith to him, Lord, he already stinketh, for he is dead
four days. 40 :Jesus saith to her, Said I not to thee, that if thou believedst,
thou shouldest see the glory of :God? 41 They took away therefore the
stone. And :Jesus lifted up his :eyes, and said, Father, I thank thee that
thou heardest me. 42 And I knew that thou hearest me always: but because
of the crowd that standeth around I said it, that they may believe that thou
didst send me. 43 And when he had thus spoken, he cried with a loud voice,
Lazarus, come forth. 44 The dead man came forth, bound :hand and :foot
with grave-clothes; and his :face was bound about with a napkin. :Jesus
saith to them, Loose him, and let him go. 45 Many therefore of the Jews,
who came unto :Mariam and beheld what he did, believed unto him. 46 But
some of them went away unto the Pharisees, and told them what things
Jesus had done. 47 The chief priests therefore and the Pharisees
gathered a Sanhedrin, and said, What do we? because this :man doeth
many signs. 48 If we let him thus alone, all will believe on him: and the
Romans will come and take away both our :place and :nation. 49 But a
certain one of them, Caiaphas, being high priest of that :year, said to them,
YE know nothing at all, 50 nor consider that it is expedient for you that one
man should die for the people, and the whole nation perish not. 51 Now this
he said not of himself: but being high priest of that :year, he prophesied that
Jesus should die for the nation; 52 and not for the nation only, but that he
might also gather into one the children of :God that are scattered abroad.
53 From that :day on therefore they took counsel to kill him.
54 :Jesus therefore walked no more openly among the Jews, but
departed thence into the country near the wilderness, into a city called
Ephraim; and there tarried with the disciples. 55 Now the passover of the
Jews was near: and many went up to Jerusalem out of the country before
the passover, to purify themselves. 56 They therefore sought :Jesus, and
spake one with another, as they stood in the temple, What think ye? That
he will not come to the feast? 57 Now the chief priests and the Pharisees
had given orders, that, if any knew where he was, he should show it, that
they might take him.

Chapter 12
1 :Jesus therefore six days before the passover came to Bethany,
where :Lazarus was, whom Jesus raised from the dead. 2 They made him
therefore a supper there: and :Martha served; but :Lazarus was one of them
that sat at meat with him. 3 :Mariam therefore took a pound of ointment of
pure nard, very precious, and anointed the feet of :Jesus, and wiped
his :feet with her :hair: and the house was filled with the odor of the ointment.
4 But :Judas :Iscariot, one of his :disciples, that should deliver him up, saith,
5 Why was not this :ointment sold for three hundred shillings, and given to
the poor? 6 Now this he said, not because he cared for the poor; but
because he was a thief, and having the bag, was carrying its contents.
7 :Jesus therefore said, Suffer her to keep it against the day of my :burying.
8 For the poor ye have always with yourselves; but me ye have not always.
9 The great crowd therefore of the Jews learned that he was there: and they
came, not for :Jesus’ sake only, but that they might see :Lazarus also,
whom he raised from the dead. 10 But the chief priests took counsel to
put :Lazarus also to death; 11 because by reason of him many of the Jews
went away, and believed unto :Jesus.
12 On the morrow the great crowd that came to the feast, on hearing
that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem, 13 took the branches of the palm trees,
and went out to meet him, and shouted,
Hosanna:
Blessed who cometh in the Lord’s Name,
Even the King of :Israel.
14 And :Jesus, having found a young ass, sat thereon; even as it is
written,
15 Fear not, daughter of Zion:
Lo, thy :King cometh,
Sitting on an ass’s colt.
16 These things understood not his :disciples at first: but when Jesus was
glorified, then remembered they that these were written of him, and that
they had done these to him. 17 The crowd therefore that was with him when
he called Lazarus out of the tomb, and raised him from the dead, witnessed.
18 For this cause also the crowd met him, because they heard that he had
done this :sign. 19 The Pharisees therefore said among themselves,
Behold that ye prevail nothing. See, the world is gone after him.
20 Now certain Greeks were among those that went up to worship at
the feast: 21 these therefore came to Philip, who was of Bethsaida
of :Galilee, and asked him, saying, Sir, we would see :Jesus. 22 :Philip
cometh and telleth :Andrew; Andrew cometh, and Philip, and they
tell :Jesus. 23 And :Jesus answereth them, saying, The hour is come, that
the Son of :man should be glorified. 24 Amen, Amen, I say unto you, Except
the grain of the wheat fall into the earth and die, it abideth by itself alone; but
if it die, it beareth much fruit. 25 Who loveth his :soul loseth it; and who
hateth his :soul in this :world shall guard it unto life eternal. 26 If any serve
me, let him follow me; and where I am, there shall also :my :servant be: if
any serve me, him will the Father honor. 27 Now is my :soul troubled; and
what shall I say? Father, save me from this :hour? But for this cause came
I unto this :hour. 28 Father, glorify thy :name. A voice therefore came out
of :heaven: I both have glorified, and will glorify it again. 29 The crowd
therefore, that stood by, and heard it, said that it was thunder: others said,
An angel hath spoken to him. 30 Jesus answered and said, This :voice hath
not come for my sake, but for yours. 31 Now is a judgment of this :world:
now shall the prince of this :world be cast [out] outside. 32 And I, if I be lifted
up from the earth, will draw all unto myself. 33 But this he said, signifying by
what manner of death he should die. 34 The crowd therefore answered him,
WE have heard out of the law that the Christ abideth for ever: and how
sayest THOU, that the Son of :man must be lifted up? Who is this :Son
of :man? 35 :Jesus therefore said to them, Yet a little time is the light among
you. Walk while ye have the light, that darkness apprehend you not: and
who walketh in the darkness knoweth not wither he goeth. 36 While ye have
the light, believe unto the light, that ye may become sons of light. These
things spake Jesus, and he departed and was hidden from them. 37 But
though he had done so many signs before them, yet they believed not unto
him: 38 that the word of Isaiah the prophet be fulfilled, which he spake,
Lord, who hath believed our :report?
And to whom hath the arm of the Lord been revealed?
39 For this cause they could not believe, because Isaiah said again,
40 He hath blinded their :eyes, and hardened their :heart;
Lest they see with their eyes, and understand at heart and turn,
And I should heal them.
41 These things said Isaiah, because he saw his :glory; and he spake of him.
42 Nevertheless even of the rulers many believed unto him; but because of
the Pharisees they did not confess, lest they should be put out of the
synagogue: 43 for they loved the glory from :men more than the glory
from :God. 44 And Jesus cried and said, Who believeth unto me,
believeth not unto me, but unto him that sent me. 45 And who beholdeth me
beholdeth him that sent me. 46 I am come a light into the world, that
whoever believeth unto me remain not in the darkness. 47 And if any hear
my :sayings, and guard them not, I judge him not: for I came not to judge the
world, but to save the world. 48 Who rejecteth me, and receiveth not
my :sayings, hath one that judgeth him: the word that I spake, the same
shall judge him in the last day. 49 Because I spake not from myself; but the
Father that sent me, HE hath given me commandment, what I should say,
and what I shall speak. 50 And I know that his :commandment is life eternal;
what things therefore I speak, even as the Father hath said to me, thus I
speak.

Chapter 13
1 Now before the feast of the passover, :Jesus knowing that his :hour
was come for him to depart out of this :world unto the Father, having loved
his :own, those in the world, he loved them unto the end. 2 And during
supper (the devil having already put into the heart of Judas Iscariot, Simon’s
son, to deliver him up), 3 knowing that the Father had given all things into
his :hands, and that he came forth from God, and goeth unto :God, 4 he
riseth from :supper, and layeth aside his :garments; and he took a towel,
and girded himself. 5 Then he poureth water into the basin, and began to
wash the feet of the disciples, and to wipe them with the towel wherewith he
was girded. 6 He cometh therefore unto Simon Peter. He saith to him, Lord,
dost THOU wash MY :feet? 7 Jesus answered and said to him, What I do
THOU knowest not now; but shalt understand hereafter. 8 Peter saith to him,
Thou shalt never wash my :feet. Jesus answered him, If I wash thee not,
thou hast no part with me. 9 Simon Peter saith to him, Lord, not my :feet
only, but also the hands and the head. 10 Jesus saith to him, Who is bathed
needeth not save to wash his :feet, but is wholly clean: and ye are clean, but
not all. 11 For he knew him that was delivering him up; for this cause said he,
Ye are not all clean. 12 When therefore he had washed their :feet, and
taken his :garments, and reclined again, he said to them, Know ye what I
have done to you? 13 YE call me the Teacher and the Lord: and ye say well;
for I am. 14 If I therefore, the Lord and the Teacher, have washed
YOUR :feet, ye also ought to wash the feet of one another. 15 For I have
given you an example, that ye also should do even as I have done to you.
16 Amen, Amen, I say unto you, A bondman is not greater than his :lord;
neither an apostle greater than he who sent him. 17 If ye know these things,
blessed are ye if ye do them. 18 I speak not of you all: I know the ones I
chose: but that the scripture be fulfilled, Who eateth my :bread lifted up
his :heel against me. 19 From henceforth I tell you before it come to pass,
that, when it is come to pass, ye may believe that I am he. 20 Amen, Amen,
I say unto you, Who receiveth whomever I shall send receiveth me; and who
receiveth me receiveth him that sent me. 21 When Jesus had said
these things he was troubled in the spirit, and witnessed, and said, Amen,
Amen, I say unto you, that one of you shall deliver me up. 22 The disciples
looked at each other, perplexed of whom he spake. 23 One of the disciples,
whom :Jesus loved, was reclining in the bosom of Jesus. 24 Simon Peter
therefore beckoneth to this one, and saith to him, Tell who it is of whom he
speaketh. 25 HE leaning back thus on the breast of :Jesus saith to him, Lord,
who is it? 26 :Jesus therefore answereth, He it is for whom I shall dip the
sop, and give to him. On dipping, therefore, the sop, he taketh and giveth it
to Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot. 27 And after the sop, then
entered :Satan into him. Jesus therefore said to him, What thou doest, do
quickly. 28 Now none of those reclining knew for what he spake this to him.
29 For some thought, since Judas had the bag, that Jesus saith to him, Buy
what things we have need of for the feast; or, that he should give something
to the poor. 30 HE then having received the sop went out straightway: and it
was night.
31 When therefore he went out, Jesus saith, Now was the Son
of :man glorified, and :God was glorified in him; 32 and :God shall glorify him
in himself, and straightway shall he glorify him. 33 Little children, yet a little
I am with you. Ye shall seek me: and as I said to the Jews [that], Whither I
go, YE cannot come; I now say also to you. 34 A new commandment I give
to you, that ye love one another; even as I loved you, that ye also love one
another. 35 By this shall all know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love
one to another. 36 Simon Peter saith to him, Lord, wither goest thou?
Jesus answered, Whither I go, thou canst not follow me now; but thou shalt
follow afterward. 37 :Peter saith to him, Lord, why cannot I follow thee even
now? I will lay down my :life for thee. 38 Jesus answereth, Wilt thou lay
down thy :life for me? Amen, Amen, I tell thee, The cock shall in nowise
crow, till thou hast denied me thrice.

Chapter 14
1 Let not your :heart be troubled: ye believe unto :God, believe also
unto me. 2 In the house of my Father are many abodes; if not so, I would
have told you; for I am going to prepare you a place. 3 And if I go and
prepare you a place, I come again, and will receive you unto myself; that
where I am, YE be also. 4 And whither I go, ye know the way.
5 Thomas saith to him, Lord, we know not whither thou goest; how know we
the way? 6 Jesus saith to him, I am the way, and the truth, and the life: no
one cometh unto the Father, but through me. 7 If ye had known me, ye
would have known my :Father also: henceforth ye know and have seen him.
8 Philip saith to him, Lord, show us the Father, and it sufficeth us. 9 :Jesus
saith to him, Have I been so long time with you, and knowest me not, Philip?
who hath seen me hath seen the Father; how sayest THOU, Show us the
Father? 10 Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father is in
me? the words that I say to you I speak not from myself: but the Father
abiding in me doeth his :works. 11 Believe me that I am in the Father, and
the Father in me: or else believe for the very works’ sake. 12 Amen, Amen,
I say unto you, Who believeth unto me, the works that I do shall HE do also;
and greater than these shall he do; because I go unto the Father. 13 And
whatever ye shall ask in my :name, that will I do, that the Father be glorified
in the Son. 14 If ye shall ask me anything in my :name, that will I do.
15 If ye love me, ye will keep :my :commandments. 16 And I will ask the
Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he be with you for
ever, 17 the Spirit of the truth: whom the world cannot receive; because it
beholdeth him not, neither knoweth: YE know him; for he abideth with you,
and is in you. 18 I will not leave you orphans: I come unto you. 19 Yet a little,
and the world beholdeth me no more; but YE behold me: because I live, YE
shall live also. 20 In that :day YE shall know that I am in my :Father, and YE
in me, and I in you. 21 Who hath my :commandments, and keepeth them,
he it is that loveth me: and who loveth me shall be loved of my :Father, and
I will love him, and will manifest myself to him. 22 Judas (not :Iscariot)
saith to him, Lord, what is come to pass that thou shalt manifest thyself to us,
and not to the world? 23 Jesus answered and said to him, If any love me, he
will keep my :word: and my :Father will love him, and we will come unto him,
and make our abode with him. 24 Who loveth me not keepeth not my :words:
and the word which ye hear is not mine, but the Father’s who sent me.
25 These things have I spoken to you, while abiding with you. 26 But the
Comforter, the Holy :Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, HE shall
teach you all things, and bring to your remembrance all that I said to you.
27 I leave you peace; my :peace I give to you: not as the world giveth, give I
to you. Let not your :heart be troubled, neither be it fearful. 28 Ye heard
how I said to you, I go, and I come unto you. If ye loved me, ye would have
rejoiced, because I go unto the Father: because the Father is greater than I.
29 And now I have told you before it come to pass, that, when it come to
pass, ye may believe. 30 I will no more speak many words with you, for the
prince of the world cometh: and he hath nothing in me; 31 but that the world
may know that I love the Father, and as the Father gave me commandment,
thus I do. Arise, let us go hence.

Chapter 15
1 I am the true :vine, and my :Father is the husbandman. 2 Every
branch in me that beareth not fruit, he taketh it away: and every one that
beareth :fruit, he pruneth it, that it bear more fruit. 3 Already YE are clean
because of the word which I have spoken unto you. 4 Abide in me, and I in
you. Even as the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, unless it abide in the vine;
thus neither ye, unless ye abide in me. 5 I am the vine, ye are the branches:
Who abideth in me, and I in him, the same beareth much fruit: for apart from
me ye can do nothing. 6 Unless one abide in me, he is cast forth as the
branch, and is withered; and they gather them, and cast them into the fire,
and they are burned. 7 If ye abide in me and my :words abide in you, ask
whatever ye will, and it shall be done to you. 8 Herein was my :Father
glorified, that ye bear much fruit, and become my disciples. 9 Even as the
Father hath loved me, I also have loved you: abide ye in :my :love. 10 If ye
keep my :commandments, ye shall abide in my :love; even as I have kept
the commandments of my :Father, and abide in his :love. 11 These things
have I spoken to you, that :my :joy be in you, and your :joy be made full.
12 This is :my :commandment, that ye love one another, even as I have
loved you. 13 Greater love hath no one than this, that a man lay down
his :life for his :friends. 14 YE are my friends, if ye do what I command you.
15 I call you no longer bondmen; for the bondman knoweth not what his :lord
doeth: but you I have called friends; because all things that I heard from
my :Father I have made known to you. 16 Ye did not choose me, but I chose
you, and appointed you, that ye go and bear fruit, and that your :fruit abide:
that whatever ye shall ask of the Father in my :name, he give you.
17 These things I command you, that ye may love one another. 18 If the
world hateth you, ye know that it hath hated me before you. 19 If ye were of
the world, the world would love its :own: and because ye are not of the world,
but I chose you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you.
20 Remember the word that I said to you, A bondman is not greater than
his :lord. If they persecuted me, they will also persecute you; if they kept
my :word, they will keep :yours also. 21 But all these things will they do unto
you for my :name’s sake, because they know not him that sent me. 22 If I
had not come and spoken to them, they had not had sin: but now they have
no excuse for their :sin. 23 Who hateth me hateth my :Father also. 24 If I
had not done among them the works which none other did, they had not had
sin: but now have they both seen and hated both me and my :Father. 25 But
this is come to pass, that the word be fulfilled :written in their :law [that],
They hated me without cause. 26 But when the Comforter is come, whom I
will send you from the Father, the Spirit of the truth, who goeth forth from the
Father, HE shall witness of me: 27 and witness YE also, because ye are with
me from the beginning.

Chapter 16
1 These things have I spoken to you, that ye be not stumbled. 2 They
shall put you out of the synagogue: yea, the hour cometh, that whoever
killeth you shall think that he offereth service to :God. 3 And these things
they will do, because they have not known the Father, nor me. 4 But these
have I spoken to you, that when their :hour is come, ye may remember them,
that I told you. And these I said not to you from the beginning, because I
was with you. 5 But now I go unto him that sent me; and none of you asketh
me, Whither goest thou? 6 But because I have spoken these things to
you, :sorrow hath filled your :heart. 7 But I tell you the truth: It is expedient
for you that I go away; for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto
you; but if I go, I will send him unto you. 8 And HE, coming, will convict the
world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment: 9 of sin indeed,
because they believe not unto me; 10 and of righteousness, because I go
unto the Father, and ye behold me no more; 11 and of judgment, because
the prince of this :world hath been judged. 12 I have yet many things to say
to you, but ye cannot bear it now. 13 But when that one comes, the Spirit of
the Truth, he shall guide you into all the truth: for he shall not speak from
himself; but what things soever he heareth, these shall he speak: and he
shall declare to you the things to come. 14 HE shall glorify me: for he shall
take of :mine, and shall declare it to you. 15 All things whatever the Father
hath are mine: therefore said I, that he taketh of :mine, and shall declare it to
you. 16 A little while, and ye behold me no more; and again a little, and
ye shall see me. 17 Some of his :disciples therefore said one unto another,
What is this that he saith to us, A little, and ye behold me not; and again a
little, and ye shall see me: and, Because I go unto the Father? 18 They said
therefore, What is this that he saith, A little? We know not what he saith.
19 Jesus perceived that they wished to ask him, and said to them, Do ye
inquire among yourselves concerning this, that I said, A little, and ye behold
me not, and again a little and ye shall see me? 20 Amen, Amen, I say unto
you that YE shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice: YE shall be
sorrowful, but your :sorrow shall be turned into joy. 21 The woman when
she giveth birth hath sorrow, because her :hour is come: but when she
delivereth the child, she remembereth no more the tribulation, for the joy
that a man is born into the world. 22 And YE therefore now have sorrow: but
I will see you again, and your :heart shall rejoice, and your :joy no one shall
take away from you. 23 And in that :day ye shall ask me nothing. Amen,
Amen, I say unto you, If ye shall ask anything of the Father, he will give you
in my :name. 24 Hitherto ye have asked nothing in my :name: ask, and ye
shall receive, that your :joy be fulfilled. 25 These things have I spoken
to you in proverbs: an hour cometh, when I shall no more speak to you in
proverbs, but shall report to you openly of the Father. 26 In that :day ye shall
ask in my :name: and I say not unto you, that I will ask the Father for you;
27 for the Father himself loveth you, because YE have loved me, and have
believed that I came forth from the Father. 28 I came out from the Father,
and am come into the world: again, I leave the world, and go unto the Father.
29 His :disciples say, Behold, now speakest thou plainly, and speakest no
proverb. 30 Now know we that thou knowest all things, and needest not that
any one should ask thee: by this we believe that thou camest forth from God.
31 Jesus answered them, Believe ye now? 32 Lo, an hour cometh, even is
come, that ye shall be scattered, every one to his :own, and shall leave me
alone: and I am not alone, because the Father is with me. 33 These things
have I spoken to you, that in me ye may have peace. In the world ye have
tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world.

Chapter 17
1 These things spake Jesus; and lifting up his :eyes to :heaven, he
said, Father, the hour is come; glorify thy :Son, that the Son may glorify thee:
2 even as thou gavest him authority over all flesh, that whatever thou hast
given him, to them he should give eternal life. 3 And this is the eternal life, to
know thee the only true God, and whom thou didst send, Jesus Christ. 4 I
glorified thee on :earth, having accomplished the work which thou hast
given me to do. 5 And now glorify THOU me with thyself, Father, with the
glory which I had with thee before the world was. 6 I manifested
thy :name to the men whom thou gavest me out of the world: thine they
were, and thou gavest them to me; and they have kept thy :word. 7 Now
they know that all things whatsoever thou hast given me are from thee:
8 because the words which thou gavest me I have given to them; and they
received them, and truly knew that I came forth from thee, and they believed
that THOU didst send me. 9 I ask for them: I ask not for the world, but for
those whom thou hast given me; because they are thine: 10 and all
things :mine are thine, and thine mine: and I am glorified in them. 11 And I
am no more in the world, and THEY are in the world, and I come unto thee.
Holy Father, keep them in thy :name, in which thou hast given them to me,
that they be one, even as we are. 12 While I was with them, I kept them in
thy :name in which thou hast given me: and I guarded them, and not one of
them perished, but the son of :perdition; that the scripture be fulfilled. 13 But
now I come unto thee; and these things I speak in the world, that they may
have :my :joy fulfilled in themselves. 14 I have given them thy :word; and the
world hated them, because they are not of the world, even as I am not of the
world. 15 I ask not that thou take them out of the world, but that thou
shouldest keep them out of the evil one. 16 They are not of the world, even
as I am not of the world. 17 Sanctify them in the truth: :thy :word is truth.
18 Even as thou didst send me into the world, I also sent them into the world.
19 And for them I sanctify myself, that THEY also may be sanctified in the
truth. 20 And not for these only do I ask, but for them also that believe
unto me through their :word; 21 that all be one; even as thou, Father, in me,
and I in thee, that THEY also be in us: that the world believe that thou didst
send me. 22 And I have given them the glory which thou hast given me; that
they be one, even as we are one; 23 I in them, and thou in me, that they be
perfected into one; that the world know that thou didst send me, and lovedst
them, even as thou lovedst me. 24 Father, what thou hast given me, I desire
that where I am, they also be with me, that they may behold :my :glory,
which thou hast given me: because thou lovedst me before the world’s
foundation. 25 Righteous Father, the world also knew thee not, but I knew
thee; and these knew that thou didst send me; 26 and I made known to them
thy :name, and will make it known; that the love wherewith thou lovedst me
be in them, and I in them.

Chapter 18
1 These words Jesus spake, and went out with his :disciples over the
Brook of the Cedars where was a garden into which himself went in and
his :disciples. 2 Now Judas, who delivered him up, also knew the place,
because Jesus often resorted thither with his :disciples. 3 :Judas therefore
having received the band of soldiers, and officers from the chief priests and
from the Pharisees, cometh thither with lanterns and torches and weapons.
4 Jesus therefore, knowing all the things coming upon him, went forth, and
saith to them, Whom seek ye? 5 They answered him, Jesus the Nazorean.
He saith to them, I am he. And Judas also, who delivered him up, was
standing with them. 6 When therefore he said to them I am he, they went
backward, and fell to the ground. 7 Again therefore he asked them, Whom
seek ye? And they said, Jesus the Nazorean. 8 Jesus answered, I told you
that I am he; if therefore ye seek me, let these go, 9 that the word be fulfilled
which he said, [that] Of those whom thou hast given me I lost not one.
10 Simon Peter therefore having a sword drew it, and struck the high
priest’s :bondman, and cut off his :right :ear. Now the bondman’s name was
Malchus. 11 :Jesus therefore said to :Peter, Put the sword into the sheath:
the cup which the Father hath given me, shall I not drink it?
12 The band therefore and the colonel, and the officers of the Jews,
seized :Jesus and bound him, 13 and led him unto Hannas first; for he was
father in law to Caiaphas, who was high priest that :year. 14 Now Caiaphas
was he that gave counsel to the Jews, that it was expedient that one man
die for the people. 15 And Simon Peter followed :Jesus, and so did
another disciple. Now that :disciple was known to the high priest, and
entered with :Jesus into the court of the high priest; 16 but :Peter was
standing at the door without. So the other :disciple, who was known to the
high priest, went out and spake to the doorkeeper, and brought in :Peter.
17 The maid :doorkeeper therefore saith to :Peter, Art thou also of the
disciples of this man? HE saith, I am not. 18 Now the bondmen and the
officers were standing there, having made a fire of charcoal; for it was cold;
and they were warming themselves: and :Peter also was with them,
standing and warming himself. 19 The high priest therefore
asked :Jesus of his :disciples, and of his :teaching. 20 Jesus answered him,
I have spoken openly to the world; I ever taught in synagogue, and in the
temple, where all the Jews come together; and in secret spake I nothing.
21 Why askest thou me? ask them that have heard, what I spake to them:
behold, these know what things I said. 22 And when he had said these
words one of the officers standing by gave :Jesus a blow, saying,
Answerest thou the high priest thus? 23 Jesus answered him, If I have
spoken evil, witness of the evil: but if well, why smitest thou me?
24 :Hannas therefore sent him bound unto Caiaphas the high priest.
25 Now Simon Peter was standing and warming himself. They said
therefore to him, Art thou also one of his :disciples? HE denied, and said, I
am not. 26 One of the bondmen of the high priest, being a kinsman of him
whose ear Peter cut off, saith, Did not I see thee in the garden with him?
27 Peter therefore denied again: and straightway a cock crew.
28 They lead :Jesus therefore from :Caiaphas into the Prætorium:
and it was early; and themselves entered not into the Prætorium, that they
be not defiled, but might eat the passover. 29 :Pilate therefore went out unto
them, and saith, What accusation bring ye against this :man? 30 They
answered and said to him, If this man were not doing evil, we should not
have delivered him up to thee. 31 Pilate therefore said to them, Take YE him,
and judge him according to your :law. The Jews said to him, It is not lawful
for us to put any one to death: 32 that the word of :Jesus be fulfilled, which
he spake, signifying by what manner of death he should die. 33 :Pilate
therefore entered again into the Prætorium, and called :Jesus, and said to
him, Art thou the King of the Jews? 34 Jesus answered, Sayest THOU this of
thyself, or did others tell thee concerning me? 35 :Pilate answered, Am I a
Jew? :Thy :nation and the chief priests delivered thee to me: what hast thou
done? 36 Jesus answered, :My :kingdom is not of this :world:
if :my :kingdom were of this world, :my :servants would fight, that I be not
delivered to the Jews: but now is :my :kingdom not hence. 37 :Pilate
therefore said to him, Art thou king then? :Jesus answered, Thou sayest
that I am a king. I to this end have been born, and to this end am I come into
the world, that I should witness to the truth. Every one that is of the truth
heareth my :voice. 38 :Pilate saith to him, What is truth? And having
said this, he went out again unto the Jews, and saith to them, I find no crime
in him. 39 But ye have a custom, that I should release you one at the
passover: will ye therefore that I release you the King of the Jews? 40 They
cried out therefore again, saying, Not this man, but :Barabbas.
Now :Barabbas was a robber.

Chapter 19
1 :Pilate therefore took :Jesus then, and scourged him. 2 And the
soldiers platted a crown of thorns, and put it on his :head, and arrayed him
in a purple garment; 3 and came unto him, and said, Hail, :King of the Jews!
and they gave him blows. 4 And :Pilate went outside again, and saith to
them, Behold, I bring him out to you, that ye may know that I find no crime in
him. 5 :Jesus therefore came outside, wearing the thorny crown and the
purple garment. And Pilate saith to them, Behold, the man! 6 When
therefore the chief priests and the officers saw him, they cried out, saying,
Crucify, crucify him! :Pilate saith to them, Take YE him, and crucify: for I find
no crime in him. 7 The Jews answered him, WE have a law, and according
to the law he ought to die, because he made himself God’s Son.
8 When :Pilate therefore heard this word, he was the more afraid; 9 and he
entered into the Prætorium again, and saith to :Jesus, Whence art THOU?
But :Jesus gave him no answer. 10 :Pilate therefore saith to him, Speakest
thou not to me? knowest thou not that I have authority to release thee, and
have authority to crucify thee? 11 Jesus answered him, Thou wouldest
have no authority against me, except it were given thee from above:
therefore who delivered me unto thee hath greater sin. 12 Upon this :Pilate
sought to release him: but the Jews cried out, saying, If thou release this
man, thou art not :Cæsar’s friend: every one that maketh himself king
speaketh against :Cæsar. 13 When :Pilate therefore heard these :words, he
brought :Jesus out, and sat down on the judgment-seat at a place called
Pavement, but in Hebrew, Gabbatha. 14 Now it was Preparation of the
passover: it was about the sixth hour. And he saith to the Jews, Behold,
your :King! 15 THEY therefore cried out, Away with him, away with him,
crucify him! Saith :Pilate to them, Shall I crucify your :King? The chief
priests answered, We have no king but Cæsar. 16 Then therefore he
delivered him to them to be crucified.
17 They took :Jesus therefore: and he went out, bearing the cross for
himself, unto the place called Place of Skull, which is called in Hebrew
Golgotha: 18 where they crucified him, and with him two others, on either
side one, and :Jesus in the midst. 19 And :Pilate wrote a title also, and put it
on the cross. And it was written, JESUS THE NAZOREAN, THE KING OF THE
JEWS. 20 This :title therefore read many of the Jews, for the place
where :Jesus was crucified was near the city; and it was written in Hebrew,
Latin, Greek. 21 The chief priests of the Jews therefore said to :Pilate, Write
not, The King of the Jews; but, that HE said, I am King of the Jews. 22 :Pilate
answered, What I have written I have written.
23 The soldiers therefore, when they had crucified :Jesus, took
his :garments and made four parts, to every soldier a part; also the coat:
now the coat was without seam, woven from the top throughout. 24 They
said therefore one unto another, Let us not rend it, but cast lots for it, whose
it shall be: that the scripture be fulfilled,
They parted my :garments among themselves,
And upon my :vesture they cast a lot.
25 These things therefore the soldiers did. But by the cross of :Jesus were
standing his mother, and the sister of his :mother, Mary the wife of :Clopas,
and Mary :Magdalene. 26 When Jesus therefore saw his :mother, and the
disciple standing by whom he loved, he saith to his :mother, Woman, behold,
thy :son! 27 Then saith he to the disciple, Behold, thy :mother! And from
that :hour the disciple took her unto his own home.
28 After this :Jesus, knowing that all things are now finished, that the
scripture be accomplished, saith, I thirst. 29 A vessel full of vinegar was set
there; so they put a sponge full of the vinegar upon hyssop, and brought it to
his :mouth. 30 When :Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, he said, It
is finished: and he bowed his head and gave up his :spirit. 31 The Jews
therefore, since it was Preparation, that the bodies should not remain on the
cross on the sabbath (for of that :sabbath the day was high), asked :Pilate
that their :legs be broken, and they be taken away. 32 The soldiers
therefore came, and brake the legs of the first, and of the other that was
crucified with him: 33 but when they came to :Jesus, and saw that he was
dead already, they brake not his :legs: 34 but one of the soldiers with a
spear pierced his :side, and straightway blood and water came out. 35 And
who hath seen hath borne witness, and his :witness is true: and HE knoweth
that he saith true, that YE also may believe. 36 For these things came to
pass, that the scripture be fulfilled, Not a bone of him shall be crushed.
37 And again another scripture saith, They shall look to whom they have
pierced.
38 And after these things Joseph of Arimathæa, being a disciple
of :Jesus, but secretly for :fear of the Jews, asked :Pilate that he might take
away the body of :Jesus: and :Pilate gave leave. He came therefore, and
took away his :body. 39 And Nicodemus also came (who at the first came to
him by night) bringing a roll of myrrh and aloes, about a hundred pounds.
40 They took therefore the body of :Jesus, and bound it in linen cloths with
the spices, as the custom of the Jews is to bury. 41 Now in the place where
he was crucified was a garden; and in the garden a new tomb wherein man
was never yet laid. 42 There then because of the Jews’ Preparation
(because the tomb was near) they laid :Jesus.

Chapter 20
1 Now on the first day of the week cometh Mary :Magdalene early,
while it was yet dark, unto the tomb, and seeth the stone taken away from
the tomb. 2 She runneth therefore, and cometh unto Simon Peter, and unto
the other disciple whom :Jesus loved, and saith to them, They have taken
away the Lord out of the tomb, and we know not where they have laid him.
3 :Peter therefore went forth, and the other disciple, and they went to the
tomb. 4 And the two ran together: and the other disciple outran :Peter, and
came first to the tomb; 5 and stooping down, he seeth the linen cloths lying;
yet went he not in. 6 Simon Peter therefore also cometh, following him, and
went into the tomb; and he beholdeth the linen cloths lying, 7 and the napkin,
that was upon his :head, not lying with the linen cloths, but rolled up into one
place apart. 8 Then went in therefore the other disciple also, who came first
to the tomb, and he saw, and believed. 9 For as yet they knew not the
scripture, that he must rise again from the dead. 10 So the disciples went
away again unto their own. 11 But Mary was standing without at the
tomb weeping: as therefore she was weeping, she stooped into the tomb;
12 and beholdeth two angels in white sitting, one at the head, and one at the
feet, where the body of :Jesus had lain. 13 And THEY say to her, Woman,
why weepest thou? She saith to them, Because they have taken away
my :Lord, and I know not where they have laid him. 14 When she had thus
said, she turned around, and beholdeth :Jesus standing, and knew not that
it was Jesus. 15 Jesus saith to her, Woman, why weepest thou? whom
seekest thou? SHE, supposing him be the gardener, saith to him, Sir, if thou
hast borne him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him
away. 16 Jesus saith to her, Mariam. SHE turned, and saith to him in
Hebrew, Rabbounei; which is to say, Teacher. 17 Jesus saith to her, Touch
me not; for I am not yet ascended unto the Father: but go unto my :brethren,
and tell them, I ascend unto my :Father and your Father, and my God and
your God. 18 Mariam :Magdalene comes and declares to the disciples [that]
I have seen the Lord, and he had said these things to her.
19 When therefore it was evening on that day, the first of the week,
and when the doors were shut where the disciples were, for :fear of the
Jews, :Jesus came and stood in the midst, and saith to them, Peace to you.
20 And on saying this, he showed them the hands and the side. The
disciples therefore rejoiced when they saw the Lord. 21 :Jesus therefore
said to them again, Peace to you: even as Father hath sent me, I also send
you. 22 And on saying this, he breathed on them, and saith to them,
Receive the Holy Spirit; 23 whoseever :sins ye forgive, they are forgiven
them; whoseever ye retain, they are retained.
24 But Thomas, one of the twelve, :called Didymus, was not with
them when Jesus came. 25 The other disciples therefore said to him, We
have seen the Lord. But he said to them, Except I shall see in his :hands the
print of the nails, and put my :finger into the print of the nails, and put
my :hand into his :side, I will in nowise believe. 26 And after eight days
again his :disciples were within, and Thomas with them. :Jesus cometh, the
doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and said, Peace to you. 27 Then
saith he to :Thomas, Reach hither thy :finger, and see my :hands; and reach
thy :hand, and put it into my :side: and be not unbelieving, but believing.
28 Thomas answered and said to him, My :Lord and my :God. 29 :Jesus
saith to him, Because thou hast seen me, hast thou believed? blessed they
that have not seen, and have believed.
30 Many other signs therefore did :Jesus before the disciples, which
are not written in this :book: 31 but these are written, that ye may believe
that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of :God; and that believing ye may have life
in his :name.

Chapter 21
1 After these things Jesus manifested himself again to the disciples
at the sea of :Tiberias; and he manifested himself thus. 2 There were
together Simon Peter, and Thomas :called Didymus, and Nathanael :of
Cana in :Galilee, and the sons of :Zebedee, and two other of his :disciples.
3 Simon Peter saith to them, I go a fishing. They say to him, We also come
with thee. They went forth, and entered into the boat; and that :night they
caught nothing. 4 But when day was now breaking, Jesus stood on the
beach: the disciples however knew not that it was Jesus. 5 Jesus therefore
saith to them, Little children, have ye aught to eat? They answered him, No.
6 And he said to them, Cast the net on the right side of the boat, and ye shall
find. They cast therefore, and now they were not able to draw it for
multitude of :fishes. 7 That :disciple therefore whom :Jesus loved saith to
Peter, It is the Lord. Simon Peter therefore on hearing that it was the Lord,
girt his :coat about him (for he was naked), and threw himself into the sea.
8 But the other disciples came in the little boat (for they were not far from the
land, but about two hundred cubits off), dragging the net of :fishes. 9 As
therefore they got out upon the land, they see a charcoal fire laid, and a little
fish laid thereon, and bread. 10 :Jesus saith to them, Bring of the little fish
which ye have now caught. 11 Simon Peter therefore went up, and drew the
net to :land, full of great fishes, a hundred and fifty-three: and for all there
were so many, the net was not rent. 12 :Jesus saith to them, Come break
your fast. None of the disciples durst inquire of him, Who art thou? knowing
that it was the Lord. 13 Jesus cometh, and taketh the bread, and giveth
them, and the little fish likewise. 14 This is now the third time Jesus was
manifested to the disciples, after he was risen from the dead.
15 When therefore they had breakfasted, :Jesus saith to Simon Peter,
Simon, son of John, lovest thou me more than these? He saith to him, Yea,
Lord; thou knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him, Feed my little lambs.
16 He saith to him again a second time, Simon, son of John, lovest thou me?
He saith to him, Yea, Lord; THOU knowest that I love thee. He saith to him,
Tend my little sheep. 17 He saith to him the third time, Simon, son of John,
lovest thou me? :Peter was grieved because he said to him the third time,
Lovest thou me? And he said to him, Lord, THOU knowest all things; THOU
knowest that I love thee. Jesus saith to him, Feed my little sheep. 18 Amen,
Amen, I say unto thee, When thou wast younger thou girdedst thyself, and
walkedst whither thou wouldest: but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt
stretch forth thy :hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither
thou wouldest not. 19 Now this he spake, signifying by what manner of
death he shall glorify :God. And when he had spoken this, he saith to him,
Follow me. 20 :Peter, turning about, seeth the disciple whom :Jesus
loved following; who also leaned back on his :breast at the supper, and said,
Lord, who is he that delivereth thee up? 21 :Peter therefore seeing him saith
to :Jesus, Lord, what about this man? 22 :Jesus saith to him, If I will that he
tarry till I come, what is that to thee? follow THOU me. 23 This :saying
therefore went forth among the brethren, that that :disciple does not die:
yet :Jesus said not to him, that he does not die; but, If I will that he tarry till I
come, what is that to thee?
24 This is the disciple that witnesseth of these things, and wrote
these: and we know that his :witness is true.
25 And many other things also are which :Jesus did, the which if they
be written every one, I suppose that not even the world itself would contain
the books written.

THE ACTS

Chapter 1
1 THE first treatise I made, Theophilus, concerning all that Jesus began both
to do and teach, 2 until the day in which he was received up, after
commanding through the Holy Spirit the apostles whom he had chosen: 3 to
whom he also presented himself alive after his :suffering by many proofs,
appearing to them for forty days, and speaking the things concerning the
kingdom of :God: 4 and, being assembled with them, he charged them not
to depart from Jerusalem, but to wait for the promise of the Father, which ye
heard from me: 5 because John indeed baptized with water; but ye shall be
baptized in the Holy Spirit not many days hence. 6 They therefore,
having come together, asked him, saying, Lord, restorest thou at this :time
the kingdom to :Israel? 7 He said unto them, It is not for you to know times
or seasons, which the Father hath set within his own :authority. 8 But ye
shall receive power, when the Holy Spirit is come upon you: and ye shall be
my witnesses both in Jerusalem, and in all :Judæa and Samaria, and unto
the uttermost of the earth. 9 And on saying these things, he was taken up,
they looking on; and a cloud received him out of their :sight. 10 And while
they were looking steadfastly into the heaven as he went, [and] lo, two men
stood by them in white apparel; 11 who also said, Galilee men, why stand ye
looking into the heaven? this :Jesus, who was received up from you into the
heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye beheld him going into the
heaven. 12 Then they returned to Jerusalem from the mount called Olivet,
which is nigh to Jerusalem, a sabbath’s journey off. 13 And when they were
come in, they went up into the upper chamber, where they were abiding:
both Peter and John and James and Andrew, Philip and Thomas,
Bartholomew and Matthew, James son of Alphæus, and Simon the Zealot,
and Judas son of James. 14 These all with one accord continued
steadfastly in :prayer, with the women, and Mariam the mother of :Jesus,
and with his :brethren.
15 And in these :days Peter stood up in the midst of the brethren, and
said (and there was a crowd of names in the same place, about a hundred
and twenty), 16 [Men] Brethren, it was needful that the Scripture should be
fulfilled, which the Holy :Spirit foretold through David’s mouth concerning
Judas, who became guide to them that took Jesus. 17 Because he was
numbered among us, and received his lot in this :ministry. 18 (Now this man
obtained a field with the reward of his :iniquity; and falling headlong, he
burst asunder in the midst, and all his :bowels gushed out. 19 And it
became known to all the dwellers at Jerusalem; so that in their language
that :field was called Hacheldamach, that is, Field of blood.) 20 For it is
written in the book of Psalms,
Let his :habitation become desolate,
And let no one dwell therein:
and,
His :overseership let another take.
21 Of the men therefore that have companied with us all the time that the
Lord Jesus went in and went out among us, 22 beginning from the baptism
of John, unto the day that he was received up from us, of these must one
become a witness with us of his :resurrection. 23 And they put forward two,
Joseph called :Barsabbas, who was surnamed Justus, and Matthias.
24 And they prayed, and said, Thou, Lord, who knowest the hearts of all
men, show of these :two the one whom thou hast chosen, 25 to take the
place in this :ministry and apostleship from which Judas fell away, to go to
his :own :place. 26 And they gave them lots; and the lot fell upon Matthias;
and he was numbered with the eleven apostles.

Chapter 2
1 And when the day of :Pentecost was being fulfilled, all were
together in the one place. 2 And suddenly a sound came from :heaven as of
a mighty wind rushing, and it filled the whole house where they were sitting.
3 And tongues as if of fire being distributed appeared to them; and it sat
upon each of them. 4 And all were filled with the Holy Spirit, and began to
speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance. 5 Now in
Jerusalem were dwelling Jews, devout men, from every nation, those
under :heaven. 6 And when this :voice was heard, the multitude came
together, and were confounded, because each heard them speaking in his
own :language. 7 And they were amazed and marvelled, saying, Behold,
are not all these that speak Galilæans? 8 And how hear we, each in our
own :language wherein we were born? 9 Parthians and Medes and
Elamites, and the dwellers in :Mesopotamia, and Judæa and Cappadocia,
Pontus and :Asia, 10 and Phrygia and Pamphylia, Egypt and the parts
of :Libya :about Cyrene, and :Roman sojourners, both Jews and proselytes,
11 Cretans and Arabians, we hear them speak in our :tongues the mighty
works of :God. 12 And all were amazed, and perplexed, saying one to
another, What meaneth this? 13 But others mocking said [that] They are
filled with new wine. 14 But :Peter, standing with the eleven, lifted up
his :voice, and spake forth to them, Ye men of Judæa, and all that dwell at
Jerusalem, be this known to you, and give ear to my :words. 15 For these
are not drunken, as YE suppose; for it is the third hour of the day; 16 but this
is what hath been spoken through the prophet Joel:
17 And it shall be in the last days, saith :God,
I will pour forth of my :Spirit upon all flesh:
And your :sons and your :daughters shall prophesy,
And your young :men shall see visions,
And your :elders shall dream dreams:
18 Yea and on my :bondmen and on my :bondmaids in those :days
Will I pour forth of my :Spirit; and they shall prophesy.
19 And I will show wonders in :heaven above,
And signs on :earth beneath;
Blood, and fire, and vapor of smoke:
20 The sun shall be turned into darkness,
And the moon into blood,
Before the great and notable day of the Lord come:
21 And it shall be, that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord
shall be saved.
22 Men of Israel, hear these :words: Jesus the Nazorean, a man approved
of :God unto you by mighty works and wonders and signs which :God did by
him in your midst, even as yourselves know; 23 him, given up by the
determinate counsel and foreknowledge of :God, ye by the hand of lawless
men did fasten to a cross and slay: 24 whom :God raised up, having loosed
the pangs of :death: because it was not possible that he be holden of it.
25 For David saith as to him,
I beheld the Lord always before my face;
For he is on my right hand, that I be not shaken:
26 Therefore my :heart was glad, and my :tongue rejoiced;
Moreover my :flesh also shall tabernacle in hope:
27 Because thou wilt not leave my :soul unto Hades,
Neither wilt thou give thy :Holy One to see corruption.
28 Thou madest known to me life’s ways;
Thou shalt fill me with gladness from thy :countenance.
29 [Men] Brethren, I may say unto you boldly of the patriarch David, that he
both died and was buried, and his :tomb is with us unto this :day. 30 Being
therefore a prophet, and knowing that :God had sworn with an oath to him,
that of the fruit of his :loins he would set one upon his :throne; 31 he
foreseeing this spake of the resurrection of the Christ, that neither was he
left unto Hades, nor did his :flesh see corruption. 32 This :Jesus did God
raise, whereof we all are witnesses. 33 Being therefore by the right hand
of :God exalted, and having received of the Father the promise of the
Holy :Spirit, he hath poured forth this, which YE both see and hear. 34 For
David ascended not into the heavens: but himself saith,
The Lord said to my :Lord, Sit on my right hand,
35 Till I make thine :enemies the footstool of thy :feet.
36 Let all the house of Israel therefore know surely, that :God hath made him
both Lord and Christ, this :Jesus whom ye crucified. 37 Now when they
heard this, they were pricked in their heart, and said unto :Peter and the rest
of the apostles, [Men] Brethren, what shall we do? 38 And Peter said unto
them, Repent and be baptized each of you in the name of Jesus Christ unto
remission of your :sins; and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. 39 For
to you is the promise, and to your :children, and to all that are afar off, as
many as the Lord our :God shall call unto him. 40 And with many other
words he testified, and exhorted them, saying, Be saved from
this :crooked :generation. 41 They then that received his :word were
baptized: and in that :day were added about three thousand souls. 42 And
they were continuing steadfastly in the teaching and the fellowship of the
apostles, the breaking of the bread and the prayers. 43 And fear came
upon every soul: and many wonders and signs were done through the
apostles. 44 And all that believed together had all things common; 45 and
they sold their possessions and :goods, and distributed them to all,
according as any man had need. 46 And daily, continuing steadfastly with
one accord in the temple, and breaking bread at home, they partook of their
food with gladness and singleness of heart, 47 praising :God, and having
favor with all the people. And the Lord added together daily those being
saved.

Chapter 3
1 Now Peter and John were going up into the temple at the hour
of :prayer, the ninth. 2 And a certain man that was lame from his mother’s
womb was carried, whom they laid daily at the door of the temple :called
Beautiful :to ask an alms of them that entered into the temple; 3 who seeing
Peter and John about to go into the temple, asked to receive an alms. 4 And
Peter, fastening his eyes upon him, with :John, said, Look on us. 5 And he
gave heed to them, expecting to receive something from them. 6 But Peter
said, Silver and gold have I none; but what I have, that give I thee. In the
name of Jesus Christ the Nazorean, walk. 7 And he took him by the right
hand, and raised him up: and immediately his :feet and :ankle-bones
received strength. 8 And leaping up, he stood, and began to walk; and he
entered with them into the temple, walking, and leaping, and praising :God.
9 And all the people saw him walking and praising :God: 10 and they took
knowledge of him, that it was he that sat for :alms at the Beautiful Gate of
the temple; and they were filled with wonder and amazement at what had
happened to him. 11 And as he held :Peter and :John, all the people ran
together unto them in the porch :called Solomon’s, greatly wondering.
12 And :Peter seeing it, answered unto the people, Men of Israel, why
marvel ye at this? or why fasten ye your eyes on us, as though by special
power or godliness we had made him to walk? 13 The God of Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob, the God of our :fathers, hath glorified his servant Jesus;
whom YE delivered up, and denied before Pilate’s face, when HE had
determined to release him. 14 But YE denied the Holy and Righteous One,
and asked for a murderer [man] to be granted you, 15 and killed the Prince
of :life; whom :God raised from the dead; whereof we are witnesses. 16 And
by the faith in his :name hath his :name strengthened this man, whom ye
behold and know: and the faith which is through him hath given him this
perfect :soundness in the presence of you all. 17 And now, brethren, I know
that in ignorance ye did it, even as did also your :rulers. 18 But the things
which :God foreshowed through the mouth of all the prophets, that
his :Christ should suffer, he thus fulfilled. 19 Repent therefore, and turn
again, unto the blotting out of your :sins, that so seasons of refreshing may
come from the Lord’s face; 20 and he send the Christ appointed for you,
Jesus: 21 whom heaven must receive until the times of restoration of all
things, whereof :God spake by the mouth of his :holy prophets that have
been from of old. 22 Moses indeed said [that] A prophet shall the Lord God
raise up unto you from your :brethren, like unto me; to him shall ye hearken
in all things whatsoever he shall speak unto you. 23 And it shall be, that
every soul that shall not hearken to that :prophet, shall be utterly destroyed
from among the people. 24 And all the prophets from Samuel and them that
followed, as many as have spoken, they also told of these :days. 25 YE are
the sons of the prophets, and of the covenant which :God covenanted with
your :fathers, saying unto Abraham, And in thy :seed shall all the families of
the earth be blessed. 26 To you first :God, having raised up his :servant,
sent him to bless you, in turning each away from your :iniquities.

Chapter 4
1 And as they spake unto the people, the chief priests and the captain of the
temple and the Sadducees came upon them, 2 being sore troubled because
they :taught the people, and proclaimed in :Jesus the resurrection :from the
dead. 3 And they laid :hands on them, and put them in ward unto the
morrow: for it was now evening. 4 But many of them that heard the word
believed; and the number of the men came to be about five thousand.
5 And it came to pass on the morrow, that their :rulers and the elders
and the scribes were gathered in Jerusalem; 6 and Hannas the high priest,
and Caiaphas, and John, and Alexander, and as many as were of the high
priest’s kindred. 7 And when they had set them in the midst, they inquired,
With what power, or with what name, have YE done this? 8 Then Peter,
filled with the Holy Spirit, said unto them, Rulers of the people, and elders,
9 if WE today are examined concerning a good deed to an impotent man,
with what means this man is made whole; 10 be it known to you all, and to all
the people Israel, that in the name of Jesus Christ the Nazorean, whom ye
crucified, whom :God raised from the dead, even in him stands this man
here before you whole. 11 He is the stone :set at nought of you the builders,
which became head of the corner. 12 And the salvation is in none other: for
neither is there any other name under :heaven, that is :given among men,
wherein we must be saved.
13 Now when they beheld the boldness of :Peter and John, and had
apprehended that they were unlearned and ignorant men, they marvelled;
and they took knowledge of them, that they had been with :Jesus. 14 And
seeing the man that was healed standing with them, they had nothing to
gainsay. 15 But when they had commanded them to go aside out of the
Sanhedrin, they conferred among themselves, 16 saying, What shall we do
to these :men? for that indeed a notable sign hath been wrought through
them, is manifest to all that dwell in Jerusalem; and we cannot deny it.
17 But that it spread no further among the people, let us threaten them, to
speak henceforth to no man in this :name. 18 And they called and charged
them not to speak at all nor teach in the name of :Jesus. 19 But :Peter and
John answered and said unto them, Whether it is right in the sight of :God to
hearken to you rather than :God, judge ye: 20 for WE cannot but speak what
things we saw and heard. 21 But they, on further threatening, let them go,
finding nothing :how they might punish them, because of the people; for all
glorified :God for what was done. 22 For the man was more than forty years
old, on whom this :sign of :healing was done. 23 And being let go, they
came to their own, and reported all that the chief priests and the elders had
said unto them. 24 And they, when they heard it, lifted up their voice to :God
with one accord, and said, Master, thou who madest the heaven and the
earth and the sea, and all that in them is: 25 who by the Holy Spirit, through
thy servant our father David’s mouth, didst say,
Why did nations rage,
And peoples meditate vanities?
26 The kings of the earth arrayed themselves,
And the rulers were gathered together,
Against the Lord, and against his :Christ:
27 for of a truth in this :city against thy holy :servant Jesus, whom thou didst
anoint, both Herod and Pontius Pilate with nations and peoples of Israel,
were gathered together, 28 to do whatsoever thy :hand and :counsel
foreordained to come to pass. 29 And :now, Lord, look upon
their :threatenings: and grant unto thy :bondmen to speak thy :word with all
boldness, 30 while thou stretchest forth thy :hand to heal; and that signs and
wonders be done through the name of thy holy servant Jesus. 31 And when
they had prayed, the place was shaken wherein they were gathered; and all
were filled with the Holy Spirit and spake the word of :God with boldness.
32 And the multitude of them that believed were of one heart and soul:
and not even one said that aught of his :possessions was his own; but they
had all things common. 33 And with great power gave the apostles their
witness for the resurrection of the Lord Jesus: and great grace was upon
them all. 34 For neither was there any among them that lacked: for as many
as were possessors of lands or houses sold them, and brought the prices of
the things sold, 35 and laid them at the feet of the apostles: and distribution
was made to each, according as any one had need. 36 And Joseph, who by
the apostles was surnamed Barnabas (which is, being interpreted, Son of
exhortation), a Levite, Cyprian by :race, 37 having a field, sold it, and
brought the money and laid it at the feet of the apostles.

Chapter 5
1 But a certain man, Hananias by name, with Sappheira his :wife,
sold a possession, 2 and withheld part of the price, the wife also aware
thereof, and brought a certain part, and laid it at the feet of the apostles. 3
But :Peter said, Hananias, why hath :Satan filled thy :heart to lie to the
Holy :Spirit, and to withhold part of the price of the land? 4 While it remained,
did it not remain thine? and when sold, was it not in thy :power? How is it
that thou hast conceived this :thing in thy :heart? thou hast not lied to men,
but to :God. 5 And Hananias hearing these :words fell down and breathed
his last: and great fear came upon all that heard it. 6 And the younger men
arose and wrapped him round, and carried out and buried him. 7 And it
was about after three hours’ space, and his :wife, not knowing what was
done, came in. 8 And Peter answered unto her, Tell me whether ye sold the
land for so much. And she said, Yea, for so much. 9 But :Peter said unto
her, How is it that ye have agreed to try the Spirit of the Lord? lo, the feet of
them that have buried thy :husband are at the door, and they shall to carry
thee out. 10 And she fell down immediately at his :feet, and breathed her
last: and the young men came in and found her dead, and they carried her
out and buried her by her :husband. 11 And great fear came upon the whole
church, and upon all that heard these things.
12 And by the hands of the apostles were many signs and wonders
done among the people: and all were with one accord in the porch of
Solomon. 13 But of the rest durst no one join them: the people, however,
magnified them; 14 and there were the more added believing on the Lord,
multitudes both of men and women: 15 insomuch that they even carried out
the sick into the streets, and laid them on beds and couches, so that, as
Peter came by, at least his :shadow might overshadow some one of them.
16 And the multitude also came together from the cities round about
Jerusalem, bringing the sick, and those oppressed with unclean spirits: who
were all healed.
17 But the high priest rose up, and all those with him (which is the
sect of the Sadducees), and they were filled with zeal, 18 and laid :hands on
the apostles, and put them in public ward. 19 But the Lord’s angel by night
opened the doors of the prison, and brought them out, and said, 20 Go ye,
and stand and speak in the temple to the people all the words of this :Life.
21 And when they heard this, they entered into the temple about :daybreak,
and taught. But the high priest came, and those with him, and called the
Sanhedrin together, and all the senate of the sons of Israel, and sent to the
prison-house to have them brought. 22 But the officers that came found
them not in the prison; and they returned, and reported, 23 saying [that], The
prison-house we found shut in all safety, and the keepers standing at the
doors: but on opening, found no one within. 24 Now when both the captain
of the temple and the chief priests heard these :words, they were perplexed
concerning them whereunto this would come. 25 And one came and
reported [that] Lo, the men whom ye put in the prison are in the temple
standing and teaching the people. 26 Then went the captain with the
officers, and brought them, without violence; for they feared the people, lest
they be stoned. 27 And when they had brought them, they set them before
the Sanhedrin. And the high priest asked them, 28 saying, With a charge we
had charged you not to teach in this :name: and lo, ye have filled :Jerusalem
with your :teaching, and intend to bring the blood of this :man upon us.
29 But Peter and the apostles answered and said, One must obey God
rather than men. 30 The God of our :fathers raised :Jesus, whom YE slew,
hanging him on a tree. 31 Him did :God exalt with his :right hand as Prince
and Savior, to :give repentance to :Israel, and remission of sins. 32 And WE
are witnesses of these :sayings; also the Holy :Spirit, whom :God hath given
to them that obey him. 33 But they, when they heard this, were greatly cut,
and they intended to slay them. 34 But a certain Pharisee stood up in the
Sanhedrin, Gamaliel by name, a law teacher honored by all the people, and
he commanded to put the men forth a little while. 35 And he said unto them,
Men of Israel, take heed to yourselves as to these :men, what ye are about
to do. 36 For before these :days rose up Theudas, saying he was
somebody; whom a number of men, about four hundred, joined: who was
slain; and all, as many as obeyed him, were dispersed, and came to nought.
37 After this man rose up Judas the Galilæan in the days of the enrolment,
and drew away a people after him: HE also perished; and all, as many as
obeyed him, were scattered abroad. 38 And :now I say to you, Desist from
these :men, and let them go (for if this :counsel or this :work be of men, it will
be overthrown: 39 but if it is of God, ye will not be able to overthrow them);
lest haply ye be found fighting God even. 40 And to him they agreed: and
when they had called the apostles unto them, they beat and charged them
not to speak in the name of :Jesus, and dismissed them. 41 They therefore
departed from the presence of the Sanhedrin, rejoicing that they were
counted worthy to suffer dishonor for the Name. 42 And every day, in the
temple and at home, they ceased not to teach and to preach Jesus as the
Christ.

Chapter 6
1 Now in these :days, the disciples multiplying, a murmuring arose of
the Hellenists against the Hebrews, because their :widows were neglected
in the daily :ministration. 2 And the twelve called the multitude of the
disciples to them, and said, It is not pleasing God that we should forsake the
word of :God, and minister to tables. 3 But brethren, look out from among
you seven men of good report, full of the Spirit and wisdom, whom we shall
appoint over this :business. 4 But WE will continue steadfastly in :prayer,
and in the ministry of the word. 5 And the saying pleased the
whole :multitude: and they chose Stephen, a man full of faith and the Holy
Spirit, and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanōr, and Timon, and Parmenas,
and Nicolaos an Antioch proselyte; 6 whom they set before the apostles:
and when they had prayed, they laid their hands upon them.
7 And the word of :God increased; and the number of the disciples
multiplied in Jerusalem exceedingly; and a great crowd of the priests were
obedient to the faith.
8 And Stephen, full of grace and power, did great wonders and signs
among the people. 9 But certain arose of those of the synagogue :called the
synagogue of the Libertines, and Cyrenians, and Alexandrians, and those
of Cilicia and Asia, disputing with :Stephen. 10 And they could not withstand
the wisdom and the Spirit by which he spake. 11 Then they suborned men,
who said [that], We have heard him speak blasphemous words against
Moses, and :God. 12 And they stirred up both the people and the elders,
and the scribes, and came upon, seized, and brought him into the
Sanhedrin, 13 and set up false witnesses, who said, This :man ceaseth not
to speak words against this :holy :place, and the law: 14 for we have heard
him say, that this :Jesus the Nazorean shall destroy this :place, and change
the customs which Moses delivered to us. 15 And all that sat in the
Sanhedrin, fastening their eyes on him, saw :his face as if an angel’s face.

Chapter 7
1 And the high priest said, Whether these things are so? 2 And he
said, Men, brethren and fathers, hear: The God of the Glory appeared to
our :father Abraham when in :Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Haran, 3 and
said unto him, Come out of thy :land, and thy :kindred, and come hither into
the land which I shall show thee. 4 Then came he out of the land of the
Chaldæans, and dwelt in Haran: and thence, after his :father’s death God
removed him into this :land, wherein YE now dwell: 5 and he gave him none
inheritance in it, no, not so much as to set his foot on: and he promised to
give it to him in possession, and to his :seed after him, when yet he had no
child. 6 And :God spake thus, that his :seed should be sojourner in a
strange land, and that they should bring it into bondage, and ill treat for four
hundred years. 7 And the nation to which they shall be in bondage will I
judge, said :God: and after these shall they come forth and serve me in
this :place. 8 And he gave him the covenant of circumcision: and so
Abraham begat :Isaac, and circumcised him the eighth :day; and Isaac
begat :Jacob, and Jacob the twelve patriarchs. 9 And the patriarchs,
jealous against :Joseph, sold him into Egypt: and :God was with him, 10 and
delivered him out of all his :tribulations, and gave him grace and wisdom
before Pharaoh king of Egypt; and he made him governor over Egypt and all
his :house. 11 Now a famine came, over all :Egypt and Canaan, and great
tribulation: and our :fathers found no sustenance. 12 But when Jacob heard
there was grain in Egypt, he sent forth our :fathers the first time. 13 And at
the second, Joseph was made known to his :brethren; and Joseph’s :race
became manifest to :Pharaoh. 14 And Joseph sent, and called to him Jacob
his :father, and all his :kindred, seventy-five souls. 15 And Jacob went down
into Egypt; and HE died, and our :fathers; 16 and they were carried over unto
Shechem, and laid in the tomb that Abraham bought for a price in silver of
the sons of Emmōr in Shechem. 17 But as the time of the promise drew nigh
which :God vouchsafed to Abraham, the people grew and multiplied in
Egypt, 18 till another king arose over Egypt, who knew not :Joseph. 19 The
same dealt craftily with our :race, and ill-treated our :fathers, as to make
outcasts of their :babes to the end they might not live. 20 At which season
Moses was born, and was fair unto :God; and he was nourished three
months in the house of his :father: 21 and when he was cast out, the
daughter of Pharaoh took him up, and nourished him for her own son.
22 And Moses was instructed in all the wisdom of the Egyptians; and he was
mighty in his words and works. 23 But when he was forty years old, it came
into his :heart to visit his :brethren the sons of Israel. 24 And seeing one
being wronged, he defended him, and avenged the one oppressed, smiting
the Egyptian: 25 and he supposed that his :brethren understood that :God
by his hand was giving them deliverance; but they understood not. 26 And
the day following he appeared to them as they strove, and would have set
them at one again, saying, Men, ye are brethren; why wrong ye one another?
27 But who did his :neighbor wrong thrust him away, saying, Who made
thee ruler and judge over us? 28 Wouldest thou kill me, as thou killedst the
Egyptian yesterday? 29 And Moses fled at this :saying, and became a
sojourner in Midian land, where he begat two sons. 30 And when forty years
were fulfilled, an angel appeared to him in the wilderness of :Mount Sinai, in
a flame of fire in a bush. 31 And when :Moses saw it, he wondered at the
sight: and as he came near to behold, the Lord’s voice came, 32 I am the
God of thy :fathers, the God of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob. And Moses
became affrighted, and durst not behold. 33 And the Lord said to him,
Loose the shoes from thy :feet: for the place whereon thou standest is holy
ground. 34 Seeing I have seen the affliction of my :people that is in Egypt,
and have heard its :groaning, and I am come down to deliver them: and now
come hither, I will send thee into Egypt. 35 This :Moses whom they refused,
saying, Who made thee ruler and judge? him hath :God sent both as ruler
and redeemer with the hand of the angel that appeared to him in the bush.
36 This man led them forth, having done wonders and signs in :Egypt, and in
the Red sea, and in the wilderness forty years. 37 This is the Moses, who
said to the sons of Israel, A prophet shall :God raise up for you from among
your :brethren, as he raised me up. 38 This is he who was in the church in
the wilderness with the angel of Him who spake to him in :Mount Sinai, and
with our :fathers: who received living oracles to give to you: 39 to whom
our :fathers would not become obedient, but thrust him away, and turned
back in their :hearts unto Egypt, 40 saying to :Aaron, Make us gods that
shall go before us: for this :Moses, who led us forth out of Egypt land, we
know not what is become of him. 41 And they made a calf in those :days,
and brought sacrifice to the idol, and rejoiced in the works of their :hands.
42 But :God turned, and gave them up to serve the host of :heaven; as it is
written in the book of the prophets,
Did ye offer to me slain beasts and sacrifices
Forty years in the wilderness, O house of Israel?
43 And ye took up the tabernacle of :Moloch,
And the constellation of the god Rompha,
The figures which ye made to worship them:
And I will carry you away beyond Babylon.
44 Our :fathers had the tabernacle of the testimony in the wilderness, even
as he appointed who spake to :Moses, that he should make it according to
the figure that he had seen. 45 Which also our :fathers, in their turn, brought
in with Joshua when they entered on the possession of the nations that God
thrust out before the face of our :fathers, unto the days of David; 46 who
found grace in God’s sight, and asked to find a habitation for the God of
Jacob. 47 But Solomon built him a house. 48 Howbeit the Most High
dwelleth not in houses made with hands; as saith the prophet,
49 The heaven is my throne,
And the earth the footstool of my :feet:
What manner of house will ye build me? saith the Lord:
Or what is the place of my :rest?
50 Did not my :hand make all these things?
51 YE, stiffnecked and uncircumcised in hearts and :ears, always resist the
Holy Spirit: as your :fathers did, so do ye. 52 Which of the prophets did not
your :fathers :persecute? and they killed them that showed before of the
coming of the Righteous One; of whom ye have now become betrayers and
murderers; 53 ye who received the law unto ordinances of angels, and kept
it not. 54 Now when they heard these things, they were cut in
their :hearts, and gnashed their teeth at him. 55 But being full of the Holy
Spirit, he fixed his eyes on the heaven, and saw God’s glory, and Jesus
standing at :God’s right hand, 56 and he said, Lo, I behold the heavens
opened, and the Son of :man standing at :God’s right hand. 57 But they
cried out with a loud voice, and stopped their :ears, and rushed upon him
with one accord; 58 and cast him out of the city, and stoned him; and the
witnesses laid down their :garments at the feet of a youth :called Saul.
59 And they stoned :Stephen, calling upon the Lord, and saying, Lord Jesus,
receive my :spirit. 60 And he kneeled, and cried with a loud voice, Lord, lay
not this :sin to their charge. And when he had said this, he fell asleep.

Chapter 8
1 And Saul was consenting to his :death.
And a great persecution arose on that :day against the church :in
Jerusalem; and all were scattered abroad throughout the regions of :Judæa
and Samaria, except the apostles. 2 And devout men buried :Stephen, and
made great lamentation over him. 3 But Saul laid waste the church,
entering into every :house, and dragging men and women committed them
to prison.
4 And those, therefore, scattered abroad went about preaching the
word. 5 But Philip went down to the city of :Samaria, and proclaimed to
them the Christ. 6 And the crowds gave heed with one accord to the things
spoken by :Philip, as they heard them, and saw the signs which he did.
7 For many of those that had unclean spirits that cried with a loud voice,
came out, and many paralyzed and lame were healed. 8 And much joy was
in that :city. 9 But there was a certain man, Simon by name, who
beforetime in the city used sorcery, and amazed the nation of :Samaria,
saying he was some great one: 10 to whom all gave heed, from small to
great, saying, This man is the power of :God which is called Great. 11 And
they gave heed to him, because that of long time he had amazed them with
his :sorceries. 12 But when they believed :Philip preaching good tidings
concerning the kingdom of :God and the name of Jesus Christ, both men
and women were baptized. 13 And :Simon himself also believed: and being
baptized, he continued with :Philip; and beholding signs done and great
miracles, he was amazed.
14 Now when the apostles, those at Jerusalem, heard that :Samaria had
received the word of :God, they sent unto them Peter and John: 15 who,
when they were come down, prayed for them, that they receive the Holy
Spirit: 16 for as yet He was fallen upon none of them: only they had been
baptized into the name of the Lord Jesus. 17 Then laid they their hands on
them, and they received the Holy Spirit. 18 Now when :Simon saw that
through the laying on of the apostles’ :hands the Spirit was given, he
brought them money, 19 saying, Give me also this :power, that on
whomsoever I lay :hands, he receive the Holy Spirit. 20 But Peter said unto
him, Thy :silver perish with thee, because thou hast thought to obtain the gift
of :God with money. 21 Thou hast neither part nor lot in this :word: for
thy :heart is not right before :God. 22 Repent therefore of this
thy :wickedness, and pray the Lord, if perhaps the thought of thy :heart shall
be forgiven thee. 23 For I see that thou art unto the gall of bitterness and
bond of iniquity. 24 And :Simon answered and said, Pray ye for me unto the
Lord, that none of the things YE have spoken come upon me. 25 They
therefore, when they had testified and spoken the word of the Lord, returned
to Jerusalem, and preached the gospel to many villages of the Samaritans.
26 But an angel of the Lord spake unto Philip, saying, Arise, and go
toward the south unto the way that goeth down from Jerusalem unto Gaza:
the same is desert. 27 And he arose and went: and lo, a man, an Ethiopian,
a eunuch of great authority under Candace, queen of the Ethiopians, who
was over all her :treasure, who had come to Jerusalem to worship; 28 and
he was returning and sitting in his :chariot, and was reading the prophet
Isaiah. 29 And the Spirit said to :Philip, Go near, and join this :chariot.
30 And :Philip ran to him, and heard him reading Isaiah the prophet, and
said, Then thou understandest what thou readest? 31 And he said, How
can I, except some one shall guide me? And he besought :Philip to come
up and sit with him. 32 Now the passage of the scripture which he was
reading was this,
He was led as a sheep to slaughter;
And as a lamb before his :shearer is dumb,
So he openeth not his :mouth:
33 In his :humiliation his :judgment was taken away:
His :generation who shall declare?
For his :life is taken from the earth.
34 And the eunuch answered :Philip, and said, I pray thee, of whom
speaketh the prophet this? of himself, or of some other? 35 And :Philip
opened his :mouth, and beginning from this :scripture, preached the gospel
to him, :Jesus. 36 And as they went on the way, they came unto a certain
water; and the eunuch saith, Lo, water; what hindereth me to be baptized?
38 And he commanded to stop the chariot; and both went down into the
water, both Philip and the eunuch; and he baptized him. 39 And when they
came up out of the water, the Lord’s Spirit caught away :Philip; and the
eunuch saw him no more, for he went on his :way rejoicing. 40 But Philip
was found at Azotus: and passing through he preached the gospel to all the
cities, till he :came to Cæsarea.

Chapter 9
1 But Saul, yet breathing threatening and slaughter against the
disciples of the Lord, went to the high priest, 2 and asked him for letters
to :Damascus unto the synagogues; so that if he found any that were of the
Way, whether men or women, he might bring them bound to Jerusalem.
3 And as he journeyed, it came to pass that he drew nigh to :Damascus: and
suddenly a light out of :heaven shone about him: 4 and he fell upon the
earth, and heard a voice saying to him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?
5 And he said, Who art thou, Lord? And he said, I am Jesus whom thou
persecutest: 6 but rise, and enter into the city, and it shall be told thee what
thou must do. 7 And the men that journeyed with him stood speechless,
hearing the voice, but beholding no one. 8 And Saul arose from the earth;
and when his :eyes were opened, he saw nothing; and they led him by the
hand, and brought him into Damascus. 9 And he was three days without
sight, and neither ate nor drank.
10 Now a certain disciple was at Damascus, Ananias by name; and
the Lord said unto him in a vision, Ananias. And he said, Lo, here am I, Lord.
11 And the Lord said unto him, Arise, and go to the street :called Straight,
and inquire in the house of Judas for a Tarsian, Saul by name: for lo, he
prayeth; 12 and he hath seen in a vision a man Ananias by name, coming in,
and laying :hands on him, that he might receive his sight. 13 But Ananias
answered, Lord, I have heard from many of this :man, how much evil he did
to thy :saints at Jerusalem: 14 and here he hath authority from the chief
priests to bind all that call upon thy :name. 15 But the Lord said unto him,
Go: for HE is a chosen vessel to me, to bear my :name both before the
Gentiles and kings, and the sons of Israel: 16 for I will show him how many
things he must suffer for my :name. 17 And Ananias went away, and went
into the house; and laying :hands on him said, Brother Saul, the Lord, Jesus,
who appeared to thee in the way which thou camest, hath sent me, that thou
mayest receive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Spirit. 18 And
straightway as if scales fell from his :eyes, and he received his sight; and he
arose and was baptized; 19 and he took food and was strengthened.
And he was certain days with the disciples at Damascus. 20 And
straightway in the synagogues he proclaimed :Jesus, that this is the Son
of :God. 21 And all that heard him were amazed, and said, Is not this who in
Jerusalem made havoc of them that called on this :name? and he had come
hither for this, that he might bring them bound before the chief priests.
22 But Saul increased the more in strength, and confounded the Jews that
dwelt at Damascus, proving that this is the Christ.
23 And when many days were fulfilled, the Jews took counsel together to kill
him: 24 but their :plot became known to :Saul. And they also watched the
gates both day and night, so that they might kill him: 25 but his :disciples
took him by night, and let him down through the wall, lowering him in a
basket.
26 And when he was come to Jerusalem, he attempted to join
the disciples: and all were afraid of him, not believing that he was a disciple.
27 But Barnabas took and brought him unto the apostles, and rehearsed to
them how he had seen the Lord in the way, and that he had spoken to him,
and how at Damascus he had done boldly in the name of Jesus. 28 And he
was with them going in and going out at Jerusalem, 29 doing boldly in the
name of the Lord: and he spake and disputed against the Hellenists; but
THEY undertook to kill him. 30 And when the brethren knew it, they brought
him down to Cæsarea, and sent him forth to Tarsus.
31 The church therefore throughout all :Judæa and Galilee and
Samaria had peace, being edified; and, walking in the fear of the Lord and
the comfort of the Holy Spirit, was multiplied.
32 And it came to pass, as Peter went throughout all parts, he came
down also to the saints that dwelt at Lydda. 33 And there he found a certain
man named Æneas, who had kept abed eight years; and he was paralyzed.
34 And Peter said to him, Æneas, Jesus Christ healeth thee: arise, and
make thy bed. And straightway he arose. 35 And all that dwelt at Lydda and
in :Sarōn saw him, and they turned to the Lord.
36 Now a certain disciple was at Joppa, Tabeitha by name, which by
interpretation is called Dorcas: SHE was full of good works and alms which
she did. 37 And it came to pass in those :days, that she sickened, and died:
and they washed and laid her in an upper chamber. 38 And as Lydda was
nigh unto :Joppa, the disciples, hearing that Peter was there, sent two men
unto him, entreating, Delay not to come on unto us. 39 And Peter arose and
went with them. And when he was come, they brought him into the upper
chamber: and all the widows stood by him weeping, and showing how many
coats and garments :Dorcas made, while she was with them. 40 But :Peter
put all out, and knelt and prayed; and turning to the body said, Tabeitha,
arise. And SHE opened her :eyes; and seeing :Peter sat up. 41 And he gave
her his hand, and raised her up; and calling the saints and :widows,
presented her alive. 42 And it became known throughout all Joppa: and
many believed on the Lord. 43 And it came to pass, that he abode many
days in Joppa with one Simon a tanner.

Chapter 10
1 Now a certain man in Cæsarea, Cornelius by name, a centurion of
the band called the Italian 2 (devout and fearing :God with all his :house,
giving much alms to the people, and praying to :God always), 3 saw in a
vision openly, as if about the ninth hour of the day, an angel of :God coming
in unto him, and saying to him, Cornelius. 4 And he, fixing his eyes upon
him, and being affrighted, said, What is it, Lord? And he said to him,
Thy :prayers and thine :alms are gone up for a memorial before :God. 5 And
now send men to Joppa, and fetch one Simon, who is surnamed Peter: 6 HE
lodgeth with one Simon a tanner, whose house is by the sea. 7 And when
the angel that spake to him was departed, he called two of the
household-servants, and a devout soldier of those waiting on him
continually; 8 and having rehearsed all things to them, he sent them
to :Joppa.
9 Now on the morrow, as they were on their journey, and drew
nigh unto the city, Peter went up upon the housetop to pray, about the sixth
hour: 10 and he became hungry, and desired to taste food: but while they
made ready, he fell into a trance; 11 and he beholdeth the heaven opened,
and a certain vessel descending, as if a great sheet, let down by four
corners upon the earth: 12 wherein were all the fourfooted beasts and
creeping things of the earth and birds of the heaven. 13 And a voice came
unto him, Rise, Peter; kill and eat. 14 But :Peter said, Not so, Lord; for I
have never eaten aught :common and unclean. 15 And a voice came unto
him again the second time, What things :God hath cleansed, make not
THOU common. 16 And this was done thrice: and straightway the vessel
was received up into heaven.
17 Now while :Peter was perplexed in himself what the vision
be which he had seen, lo, the men :sent by :Cornelius, having made inquiry
for the house of Simon, stood before the gate, 18 and called and asked
whether Simon, :surnamed Peter, were lodging there. 19 And while :Peter
thought on the vision, the Spirit said, Lo, two men seek thee. 20 But arise,
and get down, and go with them, nothing doubting: because I have sent
them. 21 And Peter went down unto the men, and said, Lo, I am he whom
ye seek: what is the cause wherefore ye are come? 22 And they said,
Cornelius a centurion, a man righteous and fearing :God, and well reported
of by all the nation of the Jews, was warned by a holy angel to send for thee
into his :house, and to hear words from thee. 23 He therefore called them in
and lodged them. And on the morrow he arose and went forth with
them, and certain of the brethren :from Joppa went with him. 24 And on the
morrow he entered into :Cæsarea. And :Cornelius was awaiting them,
having called together his :kinsmen and near :friends. 25 And when it came
to pass that :Peter entered, :Cornelius met him, and fell down at his :feet,
and worshipped him. 26 But :Peter raised him up, saying, Stand up; I myself
also am a man. 27 And as he talked with him, he went in, and findeth many
come together: 28 and he said unto them, YE know how unlawful it is for [a
man] a Jew to join himself or come unto one of another nation; and yet to
me hath :God shown to call no man common or unclean: 29 wherefore also
I came without gainsaying, when sent for. I ask therefore for what reason ye
sent for me. 30 And :Cornelius said, Four days ago, until this :hour, I was
keeping the ninth hour of prayer in my :house; and lo, a man stood before
me in bright apparel, 31 and saith, Cornelius, thy :prayer is heard, and thine
alms are remembered before :God. 32 Send therefore to Joppa, and call for
Simon, who is surnamed Peter; HE lodgeth in the house of Simon a tanner,
by the sea. 33 Forthwith therefore I sent unto thee; and THOU hast done well
to come. Now therefore WE are all here present before :God, to hear all
things commanded thee of the Lord. 34 And :Peter opened his :mouth, and
said, Of a truth I apprehend that :God is no respecter of persons: 35 but in
every nation who feareth him, and worketh righteousness, is acceptable to
him. 36 He sent the word unto the sons of Israel, preaching good tidings of
peace by Jesus Christ (he is Lord of all)—37 that saying YE know, which was
published throughout all :Judæa, beginning from :Galilee, after the baptism
which John preached; 38 Jesus :of Nazareth, how :God anointed him with
the Holy Spirit and with power: who went about doing good, and healing all
those oppressed of the devil; for :God was with him. 39 And we are
witnesses of all things which he did both in the country of the Jews, and in
Jerusalem; whom also they slew, hanging him on a tree. 40 HIM :God
raised the third day, and gave him to be made manifest, 41 not to all the
people, but to witnesses :chosen before of :God, to us, who ate and drank
with him after he rose from the dead. 42 And he charged us to preach to the
people, and to testify that this is he :ordained of :God as Judge of living and
dead. 43 To him all the prophets witness, that through his :name every one
that believeth unto him receiveth remission of sins. 44 While :Peter yet
spake these :words, the Holy :Spirit fell on all that heard the word. 45 And
they of the circumcision that believed were amazed, who came with :Peter,
because that on the nations also was poured out the gift of the Holy :Spirit.
46 For they heard them speak with tongues, and magnify :God. Then
answered Peter, 47 Can anyone forbid the water, that these should not
be :baptized, who have received the Holy :Spirit as well as we? 48 And he
commanded them to be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ. Then asked
they him to tarry certain days.

Chapter 11
1 Now the apostles and the brethren that were in :Judæa heard that
the nations also had received the word of :God. 2 And when Peter was
come up to Jerusalem, they of the circumcision contended with him,
3 saying, that he went in unto men uncircumcised, and had eaten with them.
4 But Peter began, and expounded to them in order, saying: 5 I was in Joppa
city praying; and in a trance I saw a vision, a certain vessel descending, as
if a great sheet let down from :heaven by four corners; and it came even
unto me: 6 upon which when I had fixed my eyes, I considered, and saw the
fourfooted and the wild beasts of the earth and :creeping things and the
birds of the heaven. 7 And I heard also a voice saying to me, Rise, Peter;
kill and eat. 8 But I said, Not so, Lord: for nothing common or unclean hath
ever entered into my :mouth. 9 But a voice answered a second time out
of :heaven, What God hath cleansed, make not THOU common. 10 And this
was done thrice: and all were drawn up again into the heaven. 11 And lo,
forthwith three men stood before the house in which we were, sent from
Cæsarea unto me. 12 And the Spirit told me to go with them, making no
distinction. And these :six brethren also went with me; and we went in into
the man’s :house: 13 and he reported to us how he had seen the angel
standing in his :house, and saying, Send to Joppa, and fetch Simon, whose
surname is Peter; 14 who shall speak unto thee words, whereby THOU shalt
be saved, and all thy :house. 15 And as I :began to speak, the Holy :Spirit
fell on them, even as on us at the beginning. 16 And I remembered the word
of the Lord, how he said, John indeed baptized with water; but YE shall be
baptized in the Holy Spirit. 17 If then :God gave them the like gift as also to
us, who had believed on the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I, that I could
withstand :God? 18 And when they heard these things, they held their
peace, and glorified :God, saying, Then to the nations also hath :God
granted :repentance unto life.
19 Those therefore scattered abroad upon the tribulation that arose
about Stephen travelled as far as Phœnicia, and Cyprus, and Antioch,
speaking the word to none save only to Jews. 20 But some of them were
men of Cyprus and Cyrene, who, coming to Antioch, spake unto the
Hellenists also, preaching the gospel about the Lord Jesus. 21 And the
Lord’s hand was with them: and a great number that believed turned unto
the Lord. 22 And the report concerning them came to the ears of the church
which was in Jerusalem: and they sent forth Barnabas as far as Antioch:
23 who, when he came and saw the grace :of :God, was glad; and he
exhorted all to cleave unto the purpose of their heart in the Lord: 24 because
he was a good man, and full of the Holy Spirit and faith: and a large crowd
was added to the Lord. 25 And he went forth to Tarsus to seek for Saul;
26 and having found him, he brought him to Antioch. And it came to pass,
both that even for a whole year they were gathered together in the church
and taught a large crowd, and that the disciples were called Christians first
in Antioch.
27 Now in these :days prophets came down from Jerusalem to
Antioch. 28 And one of them Agabus by name stood up and signified by the
Spirit that a great famine would be over all the inhabited earth: which came
to pass in the days of Claudius. 29 And the disciples, every one of them
according to his ability, determined to send relief unto the brethren that
dwelt in :Judæa: 30 which also they did, sending it unto the elders by the
hand of Barnabas and Saul.

Chapter 12
1 Now about that :season Herod the king put forth his :hands to harm
certain :of the church. 2 And he killed James the brother of John with the
sword. 3 And seeing that it pleased the Jews, he proceeded to seize Peter
also. And those were the days of the unleavened loaves. 4 And when he
had taken him, he put him in prison, and delivered him to four quaternions of
soldiers to guard him; intending after the Passover to bring him forth to the
people. 5 :Peter therefore was kept in the prison: but prayer was made
earnestly of the church unto :God for him. 6 And when :Herod was about to
bring him forth, on that :night :Peter was sleeping between two soldiers,
bound with two chains: and guards before the door kept the prison. 7 And,
lo, the Lord’s angel stood by him, and a light shined in the cell: and he
smote :Peter on the side, and awoke him, saying, Rise up quickly. And
his :chains fell off from his :hands. 8 And the angel said unto him, Gird
thyself, and bind on thy :sandals. And he did so. And he saith unto him,
Cast thy :garment about thee, and follow me. 9 And he went out, and
followed; and he knew not that what was done through the angel was true,
but thought he saw a vision. 10 And when they were past the first and
second guard, they came unto the iron :gate that leadeth into the city; which
opened to them of its own accord: and they went out, and went on through
one street; and straightway the angel departed from him. 11 And
when :Peter was come to himself, he said, Now I know truly, that the Lord
hath sent forth his :angel and delivered me out of Herod’s hand and from all
the expectation of the people of the Jews. 12 And when he had considered,
he came to the house of :Mary the mother of John :surnamed Mark; where
many were gathered together and praying. 13 And when he knocked at the
door of the gate, a maid came to answer, Rhoda by name. 14 And when she
recognized the voice of Peter, she opened not the gate for :joy, but ran in,
and reported that :Peter stood before the gate. 15 And they said unto her,
Thou art mad. But she was confidently affirming it to be so. And they said,
It is his :angel. 16 But :Peter continued knocking: and when they opened,
they saw him, and were amazed. 17 But he, beckoning with the hand to be
silent, rehearsed to them how the Lord had brought him forth out of the
prison. And he said, Report these things to James, and to the brethren.
And he departed, and went to another place. 18 Now when day came, no
small stir was among the soldiers, What HAS become of :Peter! 19 And
when Herod had sought for him and found him not, he examined the guards,
and commanded that they be led away to death. And he went down
from :Judæa to Cæsarea, and tarried there. 20 Now he was highly
displeased with them of Tyre and Sidon: and they came with one accord
unto him, and, having persuaded Blastus the chamberlain of the king, they
asked for peace, because their :country was fed from the royal country.
21 And upon a set day :Herod arrayed himself in royal apparel, and sat on
the throne, and made an oration unto them. 22 And the people shouted,
God’s voice, and not man’s. 23 And immediately the Lord’s angel smote
him, because he gave not :God the glory: and he was eaten of worms, and
he expired. 24 But the word of the Lord grew and multiplied.
25 And Barnabas and Saul returned when they had fulfilled their
ministration Jerusalemward, having taken along John :surnamed Mark.

Chapter 13
1 Now in the church that was at Antioch were prophets and teachers,
both :Barnabas and Symeon :called Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene, and
Manaen foster-brother of Herod the tetrarch, and Saul. 2 And as they
ministered to the Lord, and fasted, the Holy :Spirit said, Separate me
then :Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them. 3 Then,
having fasted and prayed and laid their hands on them, they sent them
away.
4 THEY therefore, being sent forth by the Holy Spirit, went down to
Selucia; and from thence they sailed to Cyprus. 5 And when they were at
Salamis, they proclaimed the word of :God in the synagogues of the Jews:
and they had also John as attendant.
6 And having gone through the whole island unto Paphos,
they found a certain man, a sorcerer, a false prophet, a Jew, whose name
was Bar-Jesus; 7 who was with the proconsul, Sergius Paulus, a man of
understanding. HE called unto him Barnabas and Saul, and sought to hear
the word of :God. 8 But Elymas the sorcerer (for so is his :name interpreted)
withstood them, seeking to turn aside the proconsul from the faith. 9 But
Saul, who is also called Paul, filled with the Holy Spirit, fixed his eyes on him,
10 and said, O, Devil’s son, full of all guile and all villainy, enemy of all
righteousness, wilt thou not cease to pervert the right :ways of the Lord?
11 And now, lo, the Lord’s hand is upon thee, and thou shalt be blind, not
seeing the sun for a season. And immediately a mist fell on him and
darkness; and he went about seeking some to lead him by the hand.
12 Then the proconsul, when he saw what was done, believed, being
astonished at the teaching of the Lord.
13 Now those with Paul set sail from :Paphos, and came to Perga
in :Pamphylia: and John departed from them and returned to Jerusalem.
14 But THEY, passing through from :Perga, came to Antioch of :Pisidia; and
going into the synagogue on the sabbath :day, sat down. 15 And after the
reading of the law and the prophets the synagogue-rulers sent unto them,
saying, Men and brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation for the people,
say on. 16 And Paul stood up, and beckoning with the hand said, Men of
Israel, and ye that fear :God, hearken: 17 The God of this :people Israel
chose our :fathers, and exalted the people during their sojourn in Egypt land,
and with a high arm led them forth out of it. 18 And for a time of about forty
years suffered he their manners in the wilderness. 19 When he had
destroyed seven nations in Canaan land, he gave them their :land for an
inheritance for about four hundred and fifty years: 20 and after these things
he gave judges until Samuel the prophet. 21 And afterward they asked for a
king: and :God gave them :Saul son of Kish, a man of the tribe of
Benjamin—forty years. 22 And having removed him, he raised up :David to
be their king; to whom also he witnessed and said, I have found David the
son of :Jesse, a man after my :heart, who shall do all my :will[s]. 23 Of the
seed of this man hath :God according to promise brought to :Israel a Savior,
Jesus; 24 John having first preached before [the face of] his :coming the
baptism of repentance to all the people of Israel. 25 And as John was
fulfilling his :course, he said, What suppose ye that I am? I am not he. But
lo, one cometh after me the shoes of whose :feet I am not worthy to unloose.
26 Men and brethren, sons of Abraham’s race, and those among you that
fear :God, to us is the word of this :salvation sent forth. 27 For who dwell in
Jerusalem, and their :rulers, because they knew HIM not, nor the voices of
the prophets which are read every sabbath, fulfilled them by condemning
him. 28 And though they found no cause of death in him they asked of Pilate
that he be slain. 29 And when they had finished all the things :written of him,
they took him down from the tree, and laid him in a tomb. 30 But :God raised
him from the dead: 31 and he was seen for many days of them that came up
with him from :Galilee to Jerusalem, who are now his witnesses unto the
people. 32 And WE bring you good tidings of the promise made unto the
fathers, 33 that :God hath fulfilled the same unto our :children, in that he
raised up Jesus; as also it is written in the second :psalm, Thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee. 34 And that he raised him from the dead, now
no more to return to corruption, he hath spoken thus [that] I will give you the
holy, the sure blessings of David.
35 Because he saith also in another place, Thou wilt not give thy :Holy One
to see corruption. 36 For David, after he had in his own generation served
the counsel of :God, fell asleep, and was laid unto his :fathers, and saw
corruption: 37 but he whom :God raised up saw no corruption. 38 Be it
known unto you therefore, men and brethren, that through this man is
proclaimed unto you remission of sins: 39 and by him every one that
believeth is justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by
the law of Moses. 40 Look therefore lest what is spoken in the prophets
come upon you:
41 Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and vanish away;
For I work a work in your :days,
A work which ye shall in no wise believe, if one rehearse it to you.
42 And as they went out, they besought that these :words be spoken
to them the next sabbath. 43 Now when the synagogue broke up, many of
the Jews and of the devout proselytes followed :Paul and :Barnabas; who,
speaking to them, urged them to continue in the grace of :God. 44 And
the coming sabbath almost the whole city was gathered to hear the word
of :God. 45 But seeing the crowds the Jews were filled with jealousy, and
contradicted the things spoken by Paul, and blasphemed. 46 And :Paul
and :Barnabas spake out boldly, and said, It was necessary that the word
of :God should first be spoken to you. But since ye thrust it from you, and
judge yourselves unworthy of eternal :life, lo, we turn to the nations. 47 For
so hath the Lord commanded us,
I have set thee for a light of nations,
That thou be for salvation unto the uttermost of the earth.
48 And as the nations heard this, they were glad, and glorified the word
of :God: and as many as were ordained to eternal life believed. 49 And the
word of the Lord was spread abroad throughout the whole country. 50 But
the Jews urged on the devout :honorable women and the first men of the
city, and stirred up a persecution against :Paul and Barnabas, and cast
them out of their :borders. 51 But THEY shook off the dust of their feet
against them, and came unto Iconium. 52 And the disciples were filled with
joy and the Holy Spirit.

Chapter 14
1 And it came to pass in Iconium that they entered together into the
synagogue of the Jews, and so spake that a great multitude both of Jews
and of Greeks believed. 2 But the Jews that were disobedient stirred up the
souls of the nations, and made them evil affected against the brethren.
3 Long time therefore they tarried there being bold in the Lord, who
witnessed unto the word of his :grace, granting signs and wonders to be
done by their :hands. 4 But the multitude of the city was divided; and some
were with the Jews, and some with the apostles. 5 And when an onset was
made both of the nations and of the Jews with their :rulers, to treat them
shamefully and stone them, 6 they became aware of it, and fled unto the
cities of :Lycaonia, Lystra and Derbē, and the region around: 7 and there
they were preaching the gospel. 8 And at Lystra a certain man sat,
impotent in his :feet, a cripple from his mother’s womb, who never had
walked. 9 The same heard :Paul speaking: who, fixing his eyes upon him,
and seeing that he had faith to be made whole, 10 said with a loud voice,
Stand upright on thy :feet. And he leaped up and was walking. 11 And the
crowds saw what Paul had done, and they lifted up their :voice, saying in
Lycaonish, The gods are come down unto us in likeness of men. 12 And
they called :Barnabas, Jupiter; and :Paul, Mercury, since he was the
chief :speaker. 13 And the priest of :Jupiter whose temple was before the
city, brought oxen and garlands unto the gates, and would have done
sacrifice with the crowds. 14 But when the apostles, Barnabas and Paul,
heard it, they rent their own :garments, and sprang forth among the crowd,
crying out 15 and saying, Men, why do ye these things? We also are men of
like passions with you, and bring you good tidings, that ye turn from
these :vanities unto a living God, who made the heaven and the earth and
the sea, and all that in them are, 16 who in the generations gone by suffered
all the nations to walk in their :ways. 17 And yet he left not himself without
witness, in doing good and giving you from heaven rains and fruitful
seasons, filling your :hearts with food and gladness. 18 And with these
sayings they scarce restrained the crowds from doing sacrifice to them.
19 But Jews came thither from Antioch and Iconium: and
having persuaded the crowds, and stoned :Paul, they dragged him out of
the city, supposing he was dead. 20 But as the disciples surrounded him, he
rose up, and entered into the city: and on the morrow he went forth
with :Barnabas to Derbē. 21 And when they had preached the gospel to
that :city, and had discipled many, they returned to :Lystra, and to Iconium,
and to Antioch, 22 confirming the souls of the disciples, exhorting them to
continue in the faith, and that, Through many tribulations must we enter into
the kingdom of :God. 23 And when they had appointed for them elders in
every church, and had prayed with fastings, they commended them to the
Lord, on whom they had believed. 24 And they passed through :Pisidia, and
came to :Pamphylia. 25 And when they had spoken the word in Perga, they
went down to Attalia; 26 and thence they sailed to Antioch, whence they had
been committed to the grace of :God for the work which they had fulfilled.
27 And when they were come, and had gathered the church, they declared
what things :God had done with them, and that he had opened a door of
faith unto the nations. 28 And they tarried no little time with the disciples.

Chapter 15
1 And certain men coming down from :Judæa were teaching the
brethren [that], Except ye be circumcised after the custom :of Moses, ye
cannot be saved. 2 And when :Paul and :Barnabas had no small dissension
and questioning with them, they appointed Paul and Barnabas, and certain
other of them, to go up to Jerusalem unto the apostles and elders about
this :question. 3 They therefore, being brought on their way by the
church, passed through both :Phœnicia and Samaria, declaring the
conversion of the nations: and they caused great joy to all the brethren.
4 And when they came to Jerusalem, they were received of the church and
the apostles and the elders, and they rehearsed what things :God had done
with them. 5 But certain of the sect of the Pharisees who believed, rose up
saying, that it is needful to circumcise them, and to charge them to keep the
law of Moses.
6 And the apostles and the elders were gathered together to see
about this :matter. 7 And when there had been much questioning, Peter
rose up, and said unto them, Men and brethren, YE know that a good while
ago :God made choice among you, that by my :mouth the nations should
hear the word of the gospel, and believe. 8 And :God, who knoweth the
heart, bare witness, giving them the Holy Spirit, even as to us; 9 and he
made no distinction between us and them, cleansing their :hearts by :faith.
10 Now therefore why make ye trial of :God, by putting a yoke upon the neck
of the disciples which neither our :fathers nor WE were able to bear? 11 But
we believe we shall be saved through the grace of the Lord Jesus, in like
manner as they. 12 And all the multitude kept silent, and heard Barnabas
and Paul rehearsing what signs and wonders :God had wrought among the
nations through them. 13 And after they kept silent, James answered,
saying, Men and brethren, hearken to me: 14 Symeon hath rehearsed how
first :God visited the nations, to take out a people for his :name. 15 And to
this agree the words of the prophets; as it is written,
16 After these things I will return,
And will build again the tabernacle of David which is fallen;
And I will build again the ruins thereof,
And I will set it up:
17 That the residue of :men may seek after the Lord,
And all the nations upon whom my :name is called [upon them],
18 Saith the Lord, who maketh these things known from the age.
19 Wherefore MY judgment is, that we trouble not them that from among the
nations turn to :God; 20 but that we enjoin them, to abstain from the
pollutions of the idols and :fornication and what is strangled and :blood.
21 For Moses from generations of old hath in every city them that preach
him, being read in the synagogues every sabbath. 22 Then it seemed
good to the apostles and the elders, with the whole church, to choose men
out from them, and send them to Antioch with :Paul and Barnabas:
Judas :called Barsabbas, and Silas, chief men among the brethren: 23 and
they wrote by their hand, The apostles and the elder brethren to the
brethren who are of the nations in :Antioch and Syria and Cilicia, greeting:
24 Forasmuch as we have heard that certain from among us have troubled
you with words, subverting your :souls; to whom we gave no commandment;
25 it seemed good to us, having come to one accord, to choose out men and
send them unto you with our :beloved Barnabas and Paul, 26 men that have
hazarded their :lives for the name of our :Lord Jesus Christ. 27 We have
sent therefore Judas and Silas, who themselves also shall tell you the same
things by word of mouth. 28 For it seemed good to the Holy :Spirit, and to us,
to lay upon you no greater burden than these :necessary things: 29 to
abstain from things sacrificed to idols and from blood, and from things
strangled, and from fornication; from which if ye keep yourselves, ye shall
do well. Fare well.
30 They therefore when dismissed, came down to Antioch; and
having gathered the multitude, delivered the epistle. 31 And when they had
read it, they rejoiced for the consolation. 32 And Judas and Silas, being
themselves also prophets, exhorted and confirmed the brethren with many
words. 33 And after they had spent some time there, they were dismissed in
peace from the brethren unto those that had sent them forth. 35 But
Paul and Barnabas tarried in Antioch, teaching and preaching the gospel of
the word of the Lord, with many others also.
36 And after some days Paul said unto Barnabas, Let us return now
and visit the brethren in every city wherein we proclaimed the word of the
Lord, and see how they fare. 37 And Barnabas was minded to take with
them :John also, :called Mark. 38 But Paul thought not good to take with
them him who withdrew from them from Pamphylia and went not with them
to the work. 39 And a sharp contention arose, so that they parted from one
another, and :Barnabas took :Mark along, and sailed away unto Cyprus:
40 but Paul chose Silas, and went forth, being committed by the brethren to
the grace of the Lord. 41 And he went through :Syria and :Cilicia, confirming
the churches.

Chapter 16
1 And he came also to Derbe and to Lystra: and lo, a certain disciple
was there, Timothy by name, son of a Jewish woman that believed; but his
father was a Greek. 2 He was well reported of by the brethren at Lystra and
Iconium. 3 Him would :Paul have to go forth with him; and he took and
circumcised him because of the Jews that were in those :parts: for all knew
that his :father was a Greek. 4 And as they were proceeding through the
cities, they delivered them for keeping the decrees :ordained of the apostles
and elders :at Jerusalem. 5 So the churches were strengthened in the
faith, and increased in number daily.
6 And they went through :Phrygia and the Galatia region, having
been hindered by the Holy Spirit to speak the word in :Asia; 7 and coming
over against :Mysia, they attempted to go into :Bithynia; and the Spirit of
Jesus suffered them not; 8 and passing by :Mysia, they came down to Troas.
9 And a vision appeared to :Paul at night: A certain Macedonian man was
standing and beseeching him, and saying, Come over into Macedonia, and
help us. 10 And when he had seen the vision, straightway we sought to go
forth into Macedonia, concluding that :God had called us to preach the
gospel unto them.
11 Setting sail therefore from Troas, we made a straight course to
Samothracē, and the day following to Neapolis; 12 and thence to Philippi,
which is a city of Macedonia, first of the district, a colony.
And we were in this :city tarrying certain days. 13 And on the
day of the sabbaths we went forth without the gate by a river side, where we
supposed was a prayer-place; and we sat down, and spake to the women
that were come together. 14 And a certain woman Lydia by name, a
purple-seller of Thyateira City, one that worshipped :God, heard us:
whose :heart the Lord opened to give heed to the things spoken by Paul.
15 And when she was baptized, and her :house, she besought us, saying, If
ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my :house, and
abide. And she constrained us. 16 And it came to pass, as we were
going to the prayer-place, that a certain maid having a spirit of divination
met us, who brought her :masters much gain by soothsaying. 17 The same
following after :Paul and us cried out, saying, These :men are bondmen of
the Most High :God, who proclaim to you a way of salvation. 18 And this she
did for many days. But Paul, being sore troubled, turned and said to the
spirit, I charge thee in Jesus Christ’s name to come out of her. And it came
out that very hour. 19 But her :masters seeing that the hope of their :gain
was gone, they laid hold on :Paul and :Silas, and dragged them into the
market before the rulers, 20 and when they had brought them to the praetors,
they said, These :men, being Jews, do trouble our :city greatly, 21 and set
forth customs which it is not lawful for us to receive, or to observe, being
Romans. 22 And the crowd rose up together against them: and the praetors
rent their :garments off them, and commanded to beat them with rods.
23 And when they had laid many stripes on them, they cast them into prison,
charging the jailor to keep them safely: 24 who, having received such a
charge, cast them into the inner prison, and secured their :feet in the stocks.
25 But about :midnight Paul and Silas were praying and singing hymns
unto :God, and the prisoners were listening to them; 26 and: suddenly there
was a great earthquake, so that the foundations of the prison-house were
shaken: and immediately all the doors were opened; and every one’s bands
were loosed. 27 And the jailor being roused out of sleep and seeing the
prison :doors open, drew his :sword and was about to kill himself, supposing
that the prisoners had escaped. 28 But Paul cried with a loud voice, saying,
Do thyself no harm: for we are all here. 29 And he called for lights and
sprang in, and, trembling for fear, fell down before :Paul and Silas, 30 and
brought them out and said, Sirs, what must I do to be saved? 31 And they
said, Believe on the Lord Jesus, and THOU shalt be saved and
thy :household. 32 And they spake the word of :God to him, with all those in
his :house. 33 And he took them in that hour of the night, and washed
their :stripes; and was baptized, he and all :his, immediately. 34 And he
brought them up into the house, and set a table before them, and rejoiced
greatly with all his house, having believed in :God. 35 But when it was day,
the praetors sent the rodbearers, saying, Let those :men go. 36 And the
jailor reported the words to :Paul, that The praetors have sent to let you go:
now therefore come forth, and go in peace. 37 But :Paul said unto them,
They have beaten us publicly, uncondemned, men that are Romans, and
have cast us into prison; and now cast us out privily? nay verily; but let them
come themselves and bring us out. 38 And the rodbearers reported
these :words to the praetors: and they feared when they heard that they
were Romans: 39 and they came and besought them; and when they had
brought them out, they asked them to go away from the city. 40 And they
went out of the prison, and went in unto :Lydia’s: and seeing the brethren,
they comforted them, and went forth.

Chapter 17
1 Now when they had passed through :Amphipolis and :Apollonia,
they came to Thessalonica, where was a synagogue of the Jews: 2
and :Paul, as his :custom was, went in unto them, and for three sabbaths
reasoned with them from the scriptures, 3 opening and alleging that it
behooved the Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead; and that this :Jesus,
whom I proclaim to you, is the Christ. 4 And some of them were persuaded,
and consorted with :Paul and :Silas; and of the devout Greeks a great
multitude, and of the chief women not a few. 5 But the Jews, moved with
jealousy, took unto them certain vile men of the rabble, and gathering a
crowd, set the city on an uproar; and assaulting the house of Jason, they
sought to bring them forth to the people. 6 And when they found them not,
they dragged Jason and certain brethren before the city rulers, crying [that],
These that have turned the world upside down are come hither also;
7 whom Jason hath received: and these all act contrary to the decrees of
Cæsar, saying that there is another king, Jesus. 8 And they troubled the
crowd and the city rulers, when they heard these things. 9 And when they
had taken :security from :Jason and the rest, they let them go. 10 And
the brethren immediately sent away both :Paul and :Silas by night unto
Berea: who when they arrived went into the synagogue of the Jews. 11 Now
these were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they received the
word with all readiness of mind, examining the scriptures daily, whether
these things were so. 12 Many of them therefore believed; also of the
Greek :honorable women, and of men, not a few. 13 But when the Jews
of :Thessalonica had knowledge that the word of :God was proclaimed
by :Paul at :Berea also, they came thither also, stirring up and troubling the
crowds. 14 And then immediately the brethren sent forth :Paul to go as far
as to the sea: and both :Silas and :Timothy abode there still. 15 But they
that conducted :Paul brought him as far as Athens: and receiving a
commandment unto :Silas and :Timothy that they come unto him with all
speed, they departed.
16 Now while :Paul waited for them at :Athens, his :spirit was
provoked within him as he beheld the city full of idols. 17 So he reasoned in
the synagogue with the Jews and the devout persons, and in the market
every day with them that happened along. 18 And certain also of the
Epicurean and Stoic philosophers encountered him. And some said, What
would this :babbler say? others, He seemeth to be a setter forth of strange
demons: because he preached the gospel of :Jesus and the resurrection.
19 And they took hold of him, and brought him unto the Areopagus, saying,
Can we know what this new :teaching is, which is spoken by thee? 20 For
thou bringest certain strange things to our hearing: we would know
therefore what these things mean. 21 (Now all the Athenians and the
sojourning strangers spent their time in nothing else, but either to tell or to
hear something rather new.) 22 And Paul stood in the midst of the
Areopagus, and said, Men of Athens, in all things I perceive that ye are
rather religious. 23 For as I passed along and observed the objects of your
worship, I found also an altar with this inscription, To GOD UNKNOWN. What
therefore ye worship in ignorance, this I set forth to you. 24 The God that
made the world and all things therein, he, being Lord of heaven and earth,
dwelleth not in temples made with hands; 25 neither is he served by men’s
hands, as if he needed anything, he himself giving to all life, and breath, and
all :things; 26 and he made of one every nation of men to dwell on all the
face of the earth, having determined their appointed seasons, and the
bounds of their :habitation; 27 that they should seek :God, if haply they
might feel after and find him, though he is not far from each of us: 28 for in
him we live, and move, and have our being, as certain even of your
own :poets have said,
For we are also his offspring.
29 Being then the offspring of :God, we ought not to think the Godhead is
like unto gold, or silver, or stone, graven by art and device of man. 30 The
times of :ignorance therefore :God overlooked; but now he declareth
to :men that they should all everywhere repent: 31 inasmuch as he hath
appointed a day in which he will judge the inhabited earth in righteousness
by a man whom he hath ordained: having given assurance unto all, in that
he hath raised him from the dead. 32 Now when they heard of a
resurrection of the dead, some mocked; but others said, We will hear thee
concerning this yet again. 33 Thus :Paul went out from their midst. 34 But
certain men clave to him, and believed: among whom also Dionysius the
Areopagite, and a woman, Damaris by name, and others with them.

Chapter 18
1 After these things he departed from :Athens, and came to Corinth.
2 And he found a certain Jew Aquila by name, Pontian by :race, lately come
from :Italy, and his wife Priscilla, because Claudius had commanded all the
Jews to depart from :Rome: and he came to them; 3 and because he was of
the same trade, he abode with them, and they wrought; for by their trade
they were tentmakers. 4 And he reasoned in the synagogue every sabbath,
and was persuading both Jews and Greeks. 5 But when both :Silas
and :Timothy came down from :Macedonia, :Paul was constrained by the
word, testifying to the Jews that Jesus was the Christ. 6 And when they
opposed themselves and blasphemed, he shook out his :raiment and said
unto them, Your :blood be upon your :heads: I am clean: henceforth I will go
unto the nations. 7 And he departed thence, and went into the house of a
certain man Titius Justus by name, one that worshipped :God,
whose :house joined hard to the synagogue. 8 And Crispus, the
synagogue-ruler, believed in the Lord with all his :house; and many of the
Corinthians hearing believed, and were baptized. 9 And the Lord said
to :Paul at night by a vision, Be not afraid, but speak and hold not thy peace:
10 because I am with thee, and no man shall set on thee to harm thee:
because I have much people in this :city. 11 And he dwelt there a year and
six months, teaching the word of :God among them. 12 But when Galliō
was proconsul of :Achaia, the Jews with one accord rose up against :Paul
and brought him before the judgment-seat, 13 saying [that], This man
persuadeth :men to worship :God contrary to the law. 14 But when :Paul
was about to open his :mouth, :Gallio said unto the Jews, If indeed it were
some wrong or a wicked villainy, O ye Jews, reason would that I should bear
with you: 15 but if the questions are about words and names and your
own :law, look to it yourselves; I intend not to be judge of these. 16 And he
drove them from the judgment-seat. 17 And all laid hold on Sōsthenēs, the
synagogue-ruler, and beat him before the judgment-seat. And Gallio cared
for none of these things.
18 And :Paul, after staying over many days, took leave of the brethren, and
sailed thence for :Syria, and with him Priscilla and Aquila: having shorn
his :head in Cenchreæ; for he had a vow. 19 And they came to Ephesus,
and he left those there: but he himself entered into the synagogue, and
reasoned with the Jews. 20 And when they asked him to abide a longer time,
he consented not; 21 but taking leave of them, and saying, I will return again
unto you :God willing, he set sail from :Ephesus. 22 And having landed at
Cæsarea, he went up and greeted the Church, and went down to Antioch.
23 And having spent some time there, he departed, and went through the
region of Galatia, and Phrygia, in order, establishing all the disciples.
24 Now a certain Jew Apollōs by name an Alexandrian by :race, an
eloquent man, came to Ephesus; and being mighty in the scriptures.
25 This man had been instructed in the way of the Lord; and being fervent
in :Spirit, he spake and taught accurately the things concerning :Jesus,
knowing only the baptism of John: 26 and HE began to be bold in the
synagogue. But when Priscilla and Aquila heard him, they took him unto
them, and expounded unto him the way of :God more accurately. 27 And
when HE was minded to pass over into :Achaia, the brethren encouraged
him, and wrote to the disciples to receive him: and when he was come, he
helped them much that had believed through :grace; 28 for he powerfully
confuted the Jews publicly showing by the scriptures that Jesus was the
Christ.

Chapter 19
1 And it came to pass, that, while :Apollos was at Corinth, Paul
having passed through the upper regions came to Ephesus, and found
certain disciples: 2 and he said unto them, Whether ye received the Holy
Spirit when ye believed? And they said unto him, Nay, we did not so much
as hear whether there is a Holy Spirit. 3 And he said, Into what then were ye
baptized? And they said, Into the baptism of John. 4 And Paul said, John
baptized a baptism of repentance, saying to the people that they should
believe unto him that should come after him, that is, unto :Jesus. 5 And
when they heard this, they were baptized into the name of the Lord Jesus.
6 And when :Paul had laid :hands upon them, the Holy :Spirit came on them;
and they spake with tongues, and prophesied. 7 And they were in :all about
twelve men. 8 And he entered into the synagogue, and spake boldly for
three months reasoning and persuading concerning the kingdom of :God.
9 But when some were hardened and disobedient, speaking evil of the Way
before the multitude, he departed from them, and separated the disciples,
reasoning daily in the school of Tyrannus. 10 And this continued for two
years; so that all that dwelt in :Asia heard the word of the Lord, both Jews
and Greeks. 11 And :God wrought :special miracles by the hands of
Paul: 12 so that unto the sick were even carried away from his :body
handkerchiefs or aprons, and the diseases departed from them, and the
evil :spirits went out. 13 But certain also of the strolling Jews, exorcists,
undertook to name over those having the evil :spirits the name of the Lord
Jesus, saying, I adjure you by :Jesus whom Paul preacheth. 14 And seven
sons of one Sceva, a Jew, a chief priest, were doing this. 15 And the
evil :spirit answered and said to them, :Jesus I acknowledge, and :Paul I
know; but who are YE? 16 And the man in whom the evil :spirit was leaped
on them, and mastered both, and prevailed against them, so that they fled
from that :house naked and wounded. 17 And this became known to all,
both Jews and Greeks, that dwelt at :Ephesus; and fear fell upon them all,
and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified. 18 Many also of them that
had believed came, confessing and declaring their :deeds. 19 And not a few
of them that practised arts brought their books together and burned them in
sight of all; and they counted the prices of them, and found it fifty thousand
pieces of silver. 20 Thus mightily the word of the Lord was growing and
prevailing.
21 Now as these things were being fulfilled, :Paul purposed in the
spirit, when he had passed through :Macedonia and Achaia, to go to
Jerusalem, saying [that], After I have been there, I must also see Rome.
22 And having sent into Macedonia two of them that were ministering to him,
Timothy and Erastus, himself stayed in :Asia for a time. 23 And about
that :season no small stir arose concerning the Way. 24 For a certain
Demētrius by name, a silversmith, who made silver shrines of Diana,
brought no little business unto the craftsmen; 25 whom he gathered together,
with the workmen of like business, and said, Men, ye know that by
this :business we have our wealth. 26 And ye see and hear, that not alone
at Ephesus, but almost throughout all :Asia, this :Paul hath persuaded and
turned away a large crowd, saying that they are no gods, that are made with
hands: 27 and not only is there danger that this our :trade come into
disrepute; out also that the temple of the great goddess Diana be made of
no account, and that she should even be deposed from her majesty whom
all :Asia and the inhabited earth worshippeth. 28 And when they heard this
they were filled with wrath, and cried out, saying, Great the Diana of
Ephesians. 29 And the city was filled with the confusion: and they rushed
with one accord into the theatre, having seized Gaius and Aristarchus,
Macedonian men, Paul’s companions in travel. 30 And when Paul intended
to enter in unto the people, the disciples suffered him not. 31 And certain
also of the Asiarchs, being his friends, sent unto him and besought him not
to venture himself into the theatre. 32 Some therefore cried one thing, and
some another: for the assembly was in confusion; and the more part knew
not wherefore they were come together. 33 And they brought Alexander out
of the crowd, the Jews putting him forward. And :Alexander beckoned with
the hand, and would have made a defence unto the people. 34 But when
they perceived that he was a Jew, all with one voice for about two hours
cried out, Great the Diana of Ephesians. 35 And when the townclerk had
quieted the crowd, he saith, [:Men] Ephesians, what man is there who
knoweth not that the city of Ephesians is temple-keeper of the great Diana,
and of the image fallen from Jupiter? 36 Seeing therefore that these things
cannot be gainsaid, ye ought to be quiet, and to do nothing rash. 37 For ye
have brought these :men, neither robbers of temples nor blasphemers of
our :goddess. 38 If therefore Demetrius, and the craftsmen with him, have a
matter against any man, courts are open, and there are proconsuls: let them
accuse one another. 39 But if ye seek anything further, it shall be settled in
the regular assembly. 40 For indeed we are in danger of being accused
concerning this day’s riot, there being no cause for it: as touching it we shall
not be able to give account of this :concourse. 41 And when he had thus
spoken, he dismissed the assembly.

Chapter 20
1 And after the uproar ceased, :Paul having sent for the disciples and
exhorted them, took leave, and departed to go into Macedonia. 2 And when
he had gone through those :parts, and had given them much exhortation, he
came into :Greece. 3 And when he had spent three months there, and a
plot was laid against him by the Jews as he was about to set sail for :Syria,
he determined :to return through Macedonia. 4 And Sōpatrus of Berea, son
of Pyrrhus, accompanied him; and of the Thessalonians, Aristarchus and
Secundus; and Gaius of Derbe, and Timothy; and of Asia, Tychicus and
Trophimus. 5 But these went on, and were awaiting us at Troas. 6 And WE
sailed away from Philippi after the days of the unleavened loaves, and came
unto them to :Troas in five days; where we tarried seven days.
7 And upon the first day of the week, when we were gathered
to break bread, :Paul discoursed with them, intending to depart on the
morrow; and prolonged his :speech until midnight. 8 And many lights were
in the upper chamber where we were gathered. 9 And in the window sat a
certain youth Eutychus by name, borne down with :sleep; and as :Paul
discoursed yet longer, being borne down by his :sleep he fell down from the
third story, and was taken up dead. 10 And :Paul went down, and fell on him,
and embracing him said, Make no ado; for his :life is in him. 11 And when he
was gone up, and had broken the bread, and eaten, and had long talked
with them, even till break of day, so he departed. 12 And they brought the
lad alive, and were not a little comforted. 13 But we, going before to the
ship, set sail for :Assos, there intending to take in :Paul: for so had he
appointed, intending himself to go on foot. 14 And when he met us at :Assos,
we took him in, and came to Mitylēnē. 15 And sailing thence, we came the
following day over against Chios; and the next we touched at Samos; and
the day after we came to Milētus. 16 For :Paul had determined to sail
past :Ephesus, so that he might not have to spend time in :Asia; for he was
hastening, if it were possible for him, to be at Jerusalem the day
of :Pentecost.
17 And from :Milētus he sent to Ephesus, and called to him the elders
of the church. 18 And when they were come unto him, he said to them, YE
know, from the first day that I set foot in :Asia, how I spent with you all the
time, 19 serving the Lord with all lowliness of mind, and tears, and trials
which befell me by the plots of the Jews; 20 how I shrank not from declaring
to you anything that was profitable, and teaching you publicly, and from
house to house, 21 testifying both to Jews and to Greeks the repentance
toward God, and faith toward our :Lord Jesus. 22 And now, lo, I go bound in
the spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing what shall befall me there: 23 save
that the Holy :Spirit testifieth to me in every city, saying that bonds and
afflictions await me. 24 But I hold :life of no account as dear unto myself, so
that I may accomplish my :course, and the ministry which I received from
the Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of the grace of :God. 25 And now, lo, I
know that ye all, among whom I went about preaching the kingdom, shall
see my :face no more. 26 Wherefore I testify to you this very :day, that I am
pure from the blood of all. 27 For I shrank not from declaring to you the
whole counsel of :God. 28 Take heed to yourselves, and to all the flock, in
which the Holy :Spirit hath made you overseers, to feed the church of :God
which he purchased with his :own :blood. 29 I know that after my :departure
grievous wolves shall enter in among you, not sparing the flock; 30 and from
among yourselves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away
the disciples after themselves. 31 Wherefore watch, remembering that for
three years I ceased not to admonish every one night and day with tears.
32 And :now I commend you to the Lord, and to the word of his :grace, which
is able to build up, and to give the inheritance among all the sanctified. 33 I
coveted no one’s silver, or gold, or apparel. 34 Yourselves know that
these :hands ministered unto my :necessities, and to them that were with
me. 35 In all things I gave you an example, that so laboring ye ought to help
the weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, that Himself said, It
is more blessed to give than to receive. 36 And when he had thus spoken,
he knelt and prayed with them all. 37 And all wept sore, and fell on the neck
of Paul and kissed him, 38 sorrowing most for the word which he had
spoken, that they should behold his :face no more. And they brought him on
his way unto the ship.

Chapter 21
1 And when it came to pass that we were parted from them and had
set sail, we came with a straight course unto :Cōs, and the next day
unto :Rhodes, and thence unto Patara: 2 and having found a ship crossing
over unto Phœnicia, we went aboard, and set sail. 3 And when we had
sighted :Cyprus, and leaving it on the left, we sailed to Syria, and landed at
Tyre; for there the ship was to unlade her :burden. 4 And having found the
disciples, we tarried there seven days: and these told :Paul through the
Spirit, not to set foot in Jerusalem. 5 And when it came to pass that we had
accomplished the days, we departed and went on; all, with wives and
children, bringing us on till out of the city: and kneeling on the beach, we
prayed, and bade each other farewell; 6 and we went on board :ship, but
they returned :home. 7 And when we had finished the voyage from Tyre,
we arrived at Ptolemaïs; and we greeted the brethren, and abode with them
one day. 8 And on the morrow we departed, and came unto Cæsarea: and
entering into the house of Philip the evangelist, who was one of the seven,
we abode with him. 9 Now this man had four virgin daughters, who
prophesied. 10 And as we tarried some days, a certain prophet came down
from Judæa, Agabus by name. 11 And coming unto us, and taking the
girdle of Paul, he bound his own :feet and :hands, and said, These things
saith the Holy :Spirit, Thus shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man whose
this :girdle is, and shall deliver him into the hands of the nations. 12 And
when we heard these things, both we and they of that place besought him
not to go up to Jerusalem. 13 Then :Paul answered, What do ye, weeping
and breaking my :heart? for I am ready not to be bound only, but also to die
at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus. 14 And when he would not be
persuaded, we ceased, saying, The will of the Lord be done.
15 And after these :days we made ready our baggage and went up to
Jerusalem. 16 And some of the disciples from Cæsarea also went with us,
bringing us to one Mnason of Cyprus, an early disciple, with whom we
should lodge.
17 And when we were come to Jerusalem, the brethren received us
gladly. 18 And the day following :Paul went in with us unto James; and all
the elders were present. 19 And when he had greeted them, he rehearsed
one by one the things which :God had wrought among the nations through
his :ministry. 20 And they, when they heard it, glorified :God; and they said
to him, Thou beholdest, brother, how many myriads are among the Jews of
them that have believed; and all are zealots for the law: 21 and they have
been informed concerning thee, that thou teachest all the Jews who are
among the nations to forsake Moses, telling them not to circumcise the
children, neither to walk after the customs. 22 What is it therefore? they will
certainly hear that thou art come. 23 Do therefore this that we say to thee:
We have four men that have a vow from themselves; 24 these take, and
purify thyself with them, and be at charges for them, that they may shave
their heads: and all shall know that there is nothing in what they have been
informed concerning thee; but that thyself also art firm keeping the law.
25 But about the nations that have believed, WE sent, giving judgment that
they keep themselves from both what is sacrificed to idols, and from blood,
and from what is strangled, and from fornication. 26 Then :Paul took the
men the next day purifying himself with them, and went into the temple,
declaring the fulfillment of the days of :purification, until the offering was
offered for each of them.
27 And when the seven days were almost completed, the Jews
from :Asia, when they saw him in the temple, stirred up all the crowd and
laid :hands on him, 28 crying out, Men of Israel, help: This is the man that
teacheth all everywhere against the people, and the law, and this :place;
and moreover he brought Greeks also into the temple, and hath defiled this
holy :place. 29 For they had before seen with him in the city Trophimus the
Ephesian, whom they supposed that :Paul had brought into the temple.
30 And all the city was moved, and the people ran together; and they laid
hold on :Paul, and dragged him out of the temple: and straightway the doors
were shut. 31 And as they were seeking to kill him, tidings came up to the
colonel of the band, that all Jerusalem was in confusion; 32 who forthwith
took along soldiers and centurions, and ran down upon them: and they,
when they saw the colonel and the soldiers, left off beating :Paul. 33 Then
the colonel came near, and laid hold on him, and commanded him to be
bound with two chains; and inquired who he was, and what he had done.
34 And some shouted one thing, some another, among the crowd: and
when he could not know the certainty for the uproar, he commanded him to
be brought into the castle. 35 And when he came upon the stairs, so it was
that he was borne of the soldiers for the violence of the crowd; 36 for the
multitude of the people followed after, crying out, Away with him.
37 And as :Paul was about to be brought into the castle, he saith to the
colonel, Whether I may say something to thee? And he said, Dost thou
know Greek? 38 Art thou not then the Egyptian, who before these :days
stirred up to sedition and led out into the wilderness the four thousand men
of the Assassins? 39 But :Paul said, I am a Jew [man], of Tarsus in :Cilicia,
citizen of no mean city: and I beseech thee, give me leave to speak unto the
people. 40 And when he had given him leave, :Paul, standing on the stairs,
beckoned with the hand to the people; and when there was perfect quiet, he
spake unto them in the Hebrew language, saying,

Chapter 22
1 Men and brethren and fathers, hear ye the defence which I now make unto
you. 2 And when they heard that he spake unto them in the Hebrew
language, they were the more quiet: and he saith, 3 I am a Jew, born in
Tarsus of :Cilicia, but brought up in this :city, at the feet of Gamaliel,
instructed according to the strictness of the law of our fathers, being a zealot
for :God, even as ye all are today: 4 and I persecuted this :Way unto death,
binding and delivering into prisons both men and women. 5 As also the high
priest witnesses and all the eldership: from whom also I received letters
unto the brethren, and journeyed to Damascus to bring them also that were
there to Jerusalem in bonds to be punished. 6 And it came to pass, as I
made my journey, and drew nigh to Damascus, about noon, suddenly a
great light shone from the heaven round about me. 7 And I fell unto the
ground, and heard a voice saying to me, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou
me? 8 And I answered, Who art thou, Lord? And he said unto me, I am
Jesus the Nazorean, whom thou persecutest. 9 And they that were with me
beheld indeed the light, but heard not the voice of him that spake to me.
10 And I said, What shall I do, Lord? And the Lord said unto me, Arise, and
go into Damascus; and there it shall be told thee of all things which are
appointed for thee to do. 11 And when I could not look up for the glory of
that :light, being led by the hand of those with me I came into Damascus.
12 And one Ananias, a devout man according to the law, well reported of by
all the Jews that dwelt there, 13 came unto me, and standing by said to me,
Brother Saul, look up. And I, in that very hour looked upon him. 14 And he
said, The God of our :fathers hath appointed thee to know his :will, and to
see the Righteous One, and to hear a voice from his :mouth. 15 Because
thou shalt be a witness for him unto all men of what thou hast seen and
heard. 16 And what shall thou do now? arise, and be baptized, and wash
away thy :sins, calling on his :name. 17 And it came to pass, when I had
returned to Jerusalem, and while I prayed in the temple, I fell into a trance,
18 and saw him saying unto me, Hasten, and get thee quickly out of
Jerusalem; because they will not receive thy testimony concerning me.
19 And I said, Lord, THEY know that I was imprisoning and beating in every
synagogue them that believed on thee: 20 and when the blood of Stephen
thy :witness was shed, I myself was also standing by, and consenting, and
keeping the garments of them that slew him. 21 And he said unto me,
Depart: for I will send thee far hence unto nations. 22 And they gave
him audience unto this :word; and they lifted up their :voice, and said, Away
with such a fellow from the earth: for he is not fit to live. 23 And as they cried
out, and threw off their garments, and cast dust into the air, 24 the colonel
commanded him to be brought into the castle, bidding that he should be
examined by scourging, that he might know for what cause they so shouted
against him. 25 And when they had tied him up with the thongs, :Paul said
unto the centurion that stood by, Whether it is lawful for you to scourge a
Roman [man], and uncondemned? 26 And when the centurion heard it, he
went to the colonel and told him, saying, What art thou about to do? for
this :man is a Roman. 27 And the colonel came and said to him, Tell me, art
THOU a Roman? And he said, Yea. 28 And the colonel answered, With a
great sum obtained I this citizenship. And :Paul said, But I am even Roman
born. 29 They then that were about to examine him straightway departed
from him: and the colonel also was afraid when he knew that he was a
Roman, and because he had bound him.
30 But on the morrow, desiring to know the certainty wherefore he
was accused of the Jews, he loosed him, and commanded the chief priests
and all the Sanhedrin to come together, and brought :Paul down and set
him before them.

Chapter 23
1 And :Paul, looking steadfastly on the Sanhedrin, said, Men and brethren, I
have lived before :God in all good conscience until this :day. 2 And the high
priest Ananias commanded them that stood by him to smite him on the
mouth. 3 Then said :Paul unto him, :God shall smite thee, thou whited wall:
and sittest thou to judge me according to the law, and commandest me to
be smitten contrary to the law? 4 And they that stood by said, Revilest thou
the high priest of God? 5 And Paul said, I knew not, brethren, that he was
high priest: for it is written, Thou shalt not speak evil of a ruler of thy :people.
6 But when :Paul perceived that the one part were Sadducees and the other
Pharisees, he cried out in the Sanhedrin, Men and brethren, I am a
Pharisee, son of Pharisees; I am being judged for the hope and resurrection
of the dead. 7 And when he had said this, a dissension arose between the
Pharisees and Sadducees; and the multitude was divided. 8 For
Sadducees say there is no resurrection, neither angel, nor spirit; but
Pharisees confess :both. 9 And a great clamor arose: and some of the
scribes of the part of the Pharisees stood up, and strove, saying, We find no
evil in this :man: and what if a spirit hath spoken to him, or an angel? 10 And
when great dissension arose, the colonel, fearing lest :Paul be torn in
pieces by them, commanded the soldiery to go down and take him by force
from among them, and bring him into the castle. 11 And the following
night the Lord stood by him, and said, Be of good cheer: for as thou hast
testified :concerning me at Jerusalem, so must thou witness also at Rome.
12 And when it was day, the Jews banded together, and bound themselves
under a curse, saying they would neither eat nor drink till they had
killed :Paul. 13 And they were more than forty that made this :conspiracy.
14 And they came to the chief priests and the elders, and said, We have
bound ourselves under a great curse, to taste nothing until we kill :Paul.
15 Now therefore do YE with the Sanhedrin signify to the colonel that he
bring him down unto you, as though ye would judge :of his case more
exactly: and WE, before he comes near, are ready to slay him. 16 But the
son of the sister of Paul heard of their lying in wait, and he came and
entered into the castle and told :Paul. 17 And :Paul called unto him one of
the centurions, and said, Bring this young :man unto the colonel; for he hath
something to tell him. 18 So he took him, and brought him to the colonel,
and saith, Paul the prisoner called me unto him, and asked to bring this
youth unto thee, who hath something to say to thee. 19 And the colonel took
him by the hand, and going aside asked privately, What is it that thou hast to
tell me? 20 And he said [that], The Jews have agreed to ask thee to bring
down :Paul tomorrow unto the Sanhedrin, as though thou wouldest inquire
somewhat more exactly concerning him. 21 Do not thou therefore yield unto
them: for more than forty [men] of them lie in wait for him, who have bound
themselves under a curse, neither to eat nor to drink till they have slain him:
and now are they ready, looking for the promise from thee. 22 So the
colonel let the young man go, charging him, Tell no one that thou hast
informed me of these things. 23 And he called unto him certain two of the
centurions, and said, Get ready two hundred soldiers to go as far as
Cæsarea, and seventy horsemen, and two hundred spearmen, at the third
hour of the night: 24 and to provide beasts, that they might set :Paul thereon,
and bring him safe unto Fēlix the governor. 25 And he wrote a letter after
this :form: 26 Claudius Lysias to the excellent governor Felix, greeting.
27 This :man was seized by the Jews, and was about to be slain of them,
when I came upon them with the soldiers and rescued him, having learned
that he was a Roman. 28 And desiring to know the cause wherefore they
accused him, I brought him down to their :Sanhedrin: 29 whom I found to be
accused about questions of their :law, but to have no accusation worthy of
death or of bonds. 30 And when it was shown to me that there would be a
plot against the man, I sent him to thee forthwith, charging the accusers also
to speak against him before thee. 31 The soldiers therefore, as it
was :commanded them, took :Paul and brought him by night to :Antipatris.
32 But on the morrow they left the horsemen to go with him, and returned to
the castle: 33 and THEY, when they came to :Cæsarea and delivered the
letter to the governor, presented :Paul also before him. 34 And when he had
read it, he also asked of what province he was; and when he understood
that he was of Cilicia, 35 I will hear thee fully, said he, when thine :accusers
also are come: and he commanded him to be kept in the palace of Herod.

Chapter 24
1 And after five days the high priest Ananias came down with certain
elders, and an orator, one Tertullus; and they informed the governor
against :Paul. 2 And when he was called, :Tertullus began to accuse him,
saying,
Since by thee we have much peace, and by thy :providence evils are
corrected for this :nation, 3 we accept it both everyway and everywhere,
excellent Felix, with all thankfulness. 4 But, that I weary thee no further, I
entreat thee to hear us briefly in thy :clemency. 5 For we have found this
man a pestilence, and a mover of insurrections among all the Jews
throughout the inhabited earth, and a ringleader of the sect of the
Nazoreans: 6 who moreover attempted to profane the temple: on whom
also we laid hold: 8 from whom thou wilt be able, by examining him thyself,
to take knowledge of all these things whereof we accuse him. 9 And the
Jews also joined in, affirming that these things were so. 10 And when the
governor had beckoned to him to speak, :Paul answered, As I know that
thou hast been of many years a judge to this :nation, I cheerfully make my
defence: 11 seeing thou canst take knowledge that it is not more than twelve
days since I went up to worship at Jerusalem: 12 and neither in the temple
did they find me disputing with any one or stirring up a crowd, nor in the
synagogues, nor in the city. 13 Neither can they prove to thee the things
whereof they now accuse me. 14 But this I confess to thee, that after the
Way which they call a sect, so serve I the God of our fathers, believing all
things which are according to the law, and which are written in the prophets;
15 having hope toward :God, which these also themselves look for, that
there shall be a resurrection both of just and unjust. 16 Herein I also
exercise myself to have a conscience void of offence toward :God and :men
always. 17 Now after some years I came to bring alms to my :nation, and
offerings: 18 amidst which they found me purified in the temple, with no
crowd, nor yet with tumult: but there were certain Jews from :Asia—19 who
ought to have been here before thee, and to make accusation, if they had
aught against me. 20 Or let these themselves say what wrongdoing they
found when I stood before the Sanhedrin, 21 except for this one voice, that I
cried standing among them [that], About the resurrection I am being judged
before you today. 22 But Felix, having more exact knowledge :concerning
the Way, deferred them, saying, When Lysias the colonel shall come down,
I will determine your :matter. 23 And he gave order to the centurion that he
be in custody, and have indulgence; and not to forbid any of his own to
minister to him. 24 But after certain days, :Felix came with Drusilla, his
own :wife, who was a Jewess, and sent for :Paul, and heard him concerning
the faith unto Christ Jesus. 25 And as he reasoned of righteousness, and
self-control, and the judgment :to come, :Felix was terrified, and answered,
Go for :now; and when I have a convenient season, I will call for thee. 26 He
hoped withal that money would be given him of :Paul: wherefore also he
sent for him oftener, and communed with him. 27 But when two years
were fulfilled, :Felix was succeeded by Porcius Fēstus; and desiring to gain
favor with the Jews, :Felix left :Paul in bonds.

Chapter 25
1 Festus therefore, having entered upon his province, after three
days went up to Jerusalem from Cæsarea. 2 And the chief priests and the
principal men of the Jews informed him against :Paul; and they besought
him; 3 asking a favor against him, that he would send for him to Jerusalem;
laying a plot to kill him on the way. 4 Howbeit :Festus answered, that :Paul
was kept at Cæsarea, and that he himself was about to depart thither
shortly. 5 Let them therefore, saith he, that are of power among you go
down with me, if anything is amiss in the man, let them accuse him.
6 And when he had tarried among them not more than eight or ten days, he
went down unto Cæsarea; and on the morrow he sat on the judgment-seat,
and commanded :Paul to be brought. 7 And when he was come, the Jews
that had come down from Jerusalem stood round about him, bringing
against him many and grievous charges which they could not prove;
8 while :Paul said in his defence [that], Neither against the law of the Jews,
nor against the temple, nor against Cæsar, have I sinned at all.
9 But :Festus, desiring to gain favor with the Jews, answered :Paul and said,
Wilt thou go up to Jerusalem, and there be judged of these things before me?
10 But :Paul said, I am standing before the judgment-seat of Cæsar, where I
ought to be judged: to the Jews have I done no wrong, as thou also quite
well knowest. 11 If therefore I am a wrong-doer, and have done aught
worthy of death, I refuse not to die; but if none of those things is true
whereof these accuse me, no one can give me to them as a favor. I appeal
to Cæsar. 12 Then :Festus, when he had conferred with the council,
answered, Thou hast appealed to Cæsar: unto Cæsar shalt thou go.
13 Now when some days were passed, Agrippa the king and Bernicē
arrived at Cæsarea, having greeted :Festus. 14 And as they tarried there
rather many days, :Festus laid the case of :Paul before the king, saying,
There is a certain man left prisoner by Felix; 15 about whom, when I was at
Jerusalem, the chief priests and the elders of the Jews informed me, asking
for sentence against him. 16 To whom I answered, that it is not a custom of
the Romans to give up any one as a favor before that the accused have the
accusers face to face, and have had opportunity to make defence
concerning the accusation. 17 When therefore they were come together
here, I made no delay, but on the next day sat on the judgment-seat, and
commanded the man to be brought. 18 Concerning whom, when the
accusers stood up, they brought no charge of such evil things as I supposed;
19 but had certain questions against him of their own religion, and of one
Jesus, who was dead, whom :Paul affirmed to be alive. 20 And I, being
perplexed how to inquire concerning these things, asked whether he would
go to Jerusalem and there be judged of these matters. 21 But when :Paul
had appealed to be kept for the decision of the emperor, I commanded him
to be kept till I should send him to Cæsar. 22 And Agrippa said unto :Festus,
I also was wishing to hear the man myself. Tomorrow, saith he, thou shalt
hear him.
23 On the morrow, therefore, when :Agrippa was come and :Bernice
with great pomp, and they were entered into the place of hearing with the
colonels and the principal men of the city, at the command of :Festus :Paul
was brought in. 24 And :Festus saith, King Agrippa, and all men who are
present with us, ye behold this man, about whom all the multitude of the
Jews made suit to me, both at Jerusalem and here, crying that he ought not
to live any longer. 25 But I found he had committed nothing worthy of death:
and as he himself appealed to the emperor I determined to send him. 26 Of
whom I have nothing certain to write unto the lord. Wherefore I have
brought him forth before you, and specially before thee, king Agrippa, that,
after examination had, I may have somewhat to write. 27 For it seemeth to
me unreasonable, in sending a prisoner, not withal to signify the charges
against him.

Chapter 26
1 And Agrippa said unto :Paul, Thou art permitted to speak for thyself.
Then :Paul stretched forth his :hand, and made his defence. 2 I think myself
happy, king Agrippa, that I am to make my defence before thee today
touching all the things whereof I am accused by the Jews: 3 specially
because thou art expert in all customs and questions which are among the
Jews: wherefore I beseech thee to hear me patiently. 4 My :manner of life
then from youth up, which was from the beginning among my :nation and at
Jerusalem, know all the Jews; 5 having knowledge of me from the first, if
they be willing to testify, that after the straitest sect of our :religion I lived a
Pharisee. 6 And now I stand to be judged for the hope of the promise made
of :God unto our :fathers; 7 unto which our :twelve tribes, earnestly serving
God night and day, hope to attain. Concerning which hope I am accused by
the Jews, O King! 8 Why is it judged incredible with you, if :God doth raise
the dead? 9 I verily thought with myself that I ought to do many things
contrary to the name of Jesus the Nazōrean; 10 which also I did in
Jerusalem: and I both shut up many of the saints in prisons, having received
authority from the chief priests, and when they were put to death I also gave
my vote against them. 11 And punishing them oftentimes in all the
synagogues, I would compel them to blaspheme; and being exceedingly
mad against them, I persecuted them even unto foreign :cities. 12 On which
errand as I journeyed to :Damascus with the authority and commission of
the chief priests, 13 at midday, O king, I saw on the way a light from heaven,
above the brightness of the sun, shining round about me and them that
journeyed with me. 14 And when we were all fallen to the earth, I heard a
voice saying unto me in the Hebrew language, Saul, Saul, why persecutest
thou me? it is hard for thee to kick against goads. 15 And I said, Who art
thou, Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest. 16 But
arise, and stand upon thy :feet: for to this end have I appeared unto thee, to
appoint thee minister and witness both of the things wherein thou hast seen
me, and of those wherein I will appear to thee; 17 delivering thee from the
people, and from the nations, unto whom I send thee, 18 to open their eyes
to turn them from darkness to light and from the power of :Satan unto :God,
that they may receive remission of sins and an inheritance among those
sanctified by :faith in me. 19 Wherefore, king Agrippa, I was not disobedient
to the heavenly vision: 20 but declared both to them of Damascus first, and
at Jerusalem, and throughout all the country of :Judæa, and also to the
nations, that they should repent and turn to :God, doing works worthy
of :repentance. 21 Because of these things the Jews seized me in the
temple, and attempted to kill me. 22 Having therefore obtained the help that
is from :God, I stand unto this :day testifying both to small and great, saying
nothing but what the prophets and Moses did say should come; 23 whether
the Christ must suffer, whether he first by a resurrection of the dead should
proclaim light both to the people and to the nations. 24 And as he thus
made his defence, :Festus saith with loud :voice, Paul, thou art mad; thy
much learning turneth thee to madness. 25 But :Paul saith, I am not mad,
excellent Festus; but I speak forth words of truth and soberness. 26 For the
king knoweth of these things, unto whom I speak boldly: for I am persuaded
that none of these is hidden from him; for this hath not been done in a corner.
27 King Agrippa, believest thou the prophets? I know that thou believest.
28 And :Agrippa said unto Paul, With but little thou persuadest to make a
Christian of ME. 29 And Paul said, I would to :God, that whether with little or
with great, not thou only, but also all that hear me today, might become such
as I am, except these :bonds. 30 And the king rose, and the governor,
and Bernice, and they that sat with them: 31 and when they had withdrawn,
they spake one to another, saying [that], This :man doeth nothing worthy of
death or of bonds. 32 And Agrippa said to :Festus, This man could have
been set at liberty, if he had not appealed to Cæsar.

Chapter 27
1 And when it was determined that we should sail away for :Italy, they
delivered both :Paul and some other prisoners to a centurion, Julius by
name, of the Augustan band. 2 And embarking in a ship of Adramyntium,
about to sail unto the places on the coast of :Asia, we put to sea.
Aristarchus, a Macedonian of Thessalonica, being with us. 3 And the next
day we touched at Sidon: and :Julius treated :Paul kindly, and gave him
leave to go unto his :friends and refresh himself. 4 And putting to sea from
thence, we sailed under the lee of Cyprus, because the winds were contrary.
5 And when we had sailed across the sea which is off :Cilicia and Pamphylia,
we came to Myra, of :Lycia. 6 And there the centurion found a ship of
Alexandria sailing for :Italy; and he put us therein. 7 And when we had
sailed slowly many days, and were come with difficulty over against :Cnidus,
the wind not further suffering us, we sailed under the lee of Crete, over
against Salmōnē; 8 and with difficulty coasting along it we came unto a
certain place called Fair Havens; nigh whereunto was a city, Lasea.
9 And when much time was spent, and the voyage was now dangerous,
because the Fast also was now already gone by, :Paul admonished, 10 and
said to them, Men, I perceive that the voyage will be with injury and much
loss, not only of the lading and the ship, but also of our :lives. 11 But the
centurion gave more heed to the master and to the owner of the ship, than
to the things spoken by Paul. 12 And because the haven was not
commodious to winter in, the more part advised to put to sea thence, if by
any means they could reach Phœnix, and winter there: a haven of :Crētē,
looking down the south-west wind and down the north-west wind. 13 And
when a south wind blew softly, supposing they had obtained their purpose,
they weighed anchor and sailed along :Crete, close in shore. 14 But after no
long time a tempestuous wind beat down from it, which is called Eurakylōn,
15 and when the ship was caught, and could not face the wind, we gave way,
and were driven. 16 And running under the lee of a small island called
Cauda, we were able, with difficulty, to secure the boat: 17 and when they
had hoisted it up, they used helps, undergirding the ship; and, fearing lest
they should be cast upon the Syrtis, they lowered the gear, and so were
driven. 18 And as we labored exceedingly with the storm, the next day they
began to throw overboard; 19 and the third day they cast out with their own
hands the tackling of the ship. 20 And when neither sun nor stars shone
upon us for many days, and no small storm lay on, all hope that we should
be saved was now taken away. 21 And when they had been long without
food, then :Paul stood forth in their midst, and said, O, men, ye should have
hearkened to me, and not have set sail from :Crete, and have gotten
this :injury and :loss. 22 And :now I exhort you to be of good cheer; for no
loss of life shall be among you, but of the ship. 23 For this :night stood by
me an angel of the God whose I am, whom also I serve, 24 saying, Fear not,
Paul; thou must stand before Cæsar: and lo, :God hath granted thee all
them that sail with thee. 25 Wherefore, men, be of good cheer: for I
believe :God, that it shall be even so as it hath been spoken to me. 26 But
we must be cast upon a certain island. 27 But when the fourteenth night
was come, as we were driven to and fro in the Hadrian Sea, about :midnight
the sailors surmized they were drawing near to some country: 28 and they
sounded, and found twenty fathoms; and after a little space they sounded
again, and found fifteen fathoms. 29 And fearing lest haply we be cast on
rocky ground, they let go four anchors from the stern, and wished for the
day. 30 And as the sailors were seeking to flee out of the ship, and had
lowered the boat into the sea, under color as though they would layout
anchors from the foreship, 31 :Paul said to the centurion and to the soldiers,
Except these abide in the ship, YE cannot be saved. 32 Then the soldiers
cut away the ropes of the boat, and let her fall off. 33 And while day was
coming on, :Paul besought all to partake of food, saying, Today is the
fourteenth day that ye wait and continue fasting, having taken nothing.
34 Wherefore I beseech you to partake of food: for this is for your :safety: for
not a hair shall perish from the head of any of you. 35 And when he had said
this, and had taken bread, he gave thanks to :God in the presence of all;
and he brake it, and began to eat. 36 Then were all of good cheer, and
themselves also took food. 37 And we were in all in the ship two hundred
threescore and sixteen :souls. 38 And when they had food enough, they
lightened the ship, throwing out the grain into the sea. 39 And when it was
day, they knew not the land: but they perceived a certain bay with a beach,
and they took counsel whether they could bring the ship safe to shore.
40 And casting off the anchors, they left them in the sea, at the same time
loosing the bands of the rudders; and hoisting up the foresail to the wind,
they made for the beach. 41 But lighting upon a place where two seas met,
they ran the vessel aground; and the foreship struck and remained
unmovable, but the stern began to break up by the violence of the waves.
42 And the soldiers’ counsel was to kill the prisoners, lest anyone swim out,
and escape. 43 But the centurion, desiring to save :Paul, stayed them from
their purpose; and commanded that they who could swim should jump
overboard, and get first to the land; 44 and the rest, some on planks, and
others on some things :from the ship. And so it came to pass, that all
escaped safe to the land.

Chapter 28
1 And when we were escaped, then we knew that the island was
called Melitēnē. 2 And the barbarians showed us no common kindness: for
they kindled a fire, and received us all, because of the present :rain, and
because of the cold. 3 But when :Paul had gathered a quantity of sticks and
laid on the fire, a viper came out from the heat, and fastened on his :hand.
4 And when the barbarians saw the beast hanging from his :hand, they said
one to another, No doubt this :man is a murderer, whom, though he hath
escaped from the sea, yet :Justice hath not suffered to live. 5 Howbeit he
shook off the creature into the fire, and took no harm. 6 But they expected
that he would have swollen, or fallen down dead suddenly: but when they
were long in expectation and beheld nothing amiss come to him, they
changed their minds, and said he was a god. 7 Now in the
neighborhood of that :place were lands belonging to the chief man of the
island, Publius by name; who received us, and entertained us three days
courteously. 8 And it was so, that the father of :Publius lay sick of fever and
dysentery: unto whom :Paul entered in, and prayed, and laying :hands on
him healed him. 9 And when this was done, the rest also that had diseases
in the island came, and were cured: 10 who also honored us with many
honors; and when we sailed, they put on board such things as we needed.
11 And after three months we set sail in a ship of Alexandria which
had wintered in the island, whose sign was The Twin Brothers. 12 And
touching at Syracuse, we tarried three days. 13 And from thence we made a
circuit, and arrived at Rhēgium: and after one day a south wind sprang up,
and on the second we came to Puteoli; 14 where we found brethren, and
were entreated to tarry with them seven days: and so we came to :Rome.
15 And thence the brethren, when they heard about us, came to meet us as
far as The Market of Appius and The Three Taverns; whom when :Paul saw,
he thanked :God, and took courage. 16 And when we entered into
Rome, :Paul was suffered to abide by himself with the soldier that guarded
him.
17 And it came to pass, after three days he called together those that
were the first among the Jews: and when they were come together, he said
unto them, I, men and brethren, though I had done nothing against the
people, or the customs of our fathers, was delivered prisoner from
Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans: 18 who, when they had examined
me, intended to set me free, because of death no cause was in me. 19 But
when the Jews contradicted, I was constrained to appeal to Cæsar; not that
I had aught whereof to accuse my :nation. 20 For this cause therefore did I
invite you to see and to speak with me: for because of the hope of :Israel I
am bound with this :chain. 21 And they said unto him, WE neither received
letters from :Judæa concerning thee, nor did any of the brethren come
hither and report or speak any evil of thee. 22 But we deem it proper to hear
of thee what thou thinkest: for as concerning this :sect, it is known to us that
everywhere it is spoken against. 23 And when they had appointed him
a day, quite a number came unto him to the lodging; to whom he expounded,
testifying the kingdom of :God, and persuading them concerning :Jesus,
both from the law of Moses and the prophets, from morning till evening.
24 And some consented to the things spoken, some however disbelieved.
25 And when they agreed not among themselves, they were
dismissed, :Paul uttering one saying [that], Well spake the Holy :Spirit
through Isaiah the prophet unto your :fathers, 26 saying,
Go unto this :people, and say,
By hearing ye shall hear, and shall in no wise understand;
And looking ye shall look, and shall in no wise see:
27 For the heart of this people is waxed gross,
And their ears are dull of hearing,
ACTS 28
And their :eyes they have closed;
Lest haply they shall see with their eyes,
And hear with their ears,
And understand with their heart,
And turn again,
And I shall heal them.
28 Be it known therefore to you, that this :salvation of :God is sent to the
nations: and THEY will hear.
30 And he abode two whole years in his own hired dwelling, and
received all that went in unto him, 31 preaching the kingdom of :God, and
teaching the things concerning the Lord Jesus Christ with all boldness,
without hindrance.

OF JAMES

Chapter 1
1 JAMES, bondman of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve
tribes :in the Dispersion, greeting.
2 Count it all joy, my brethren, when ye fall into manifold temptations;
3 knowing that the proving of your :faith worketh patience. 4 But let patience
have perfect work, that ye be perfect and entire, lacking in nothing.
5 But if any of you lacketh wisdom, let him ask of :God, who giveth to all
simply and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him. 6 But let him ask in
faith, nothing doubting: for who doubteth is like a sea wave, driven by wind
and tossed. 7 For let not that :man think that he shall receive anything of the
Lord; 8 a doubleminded man, unstable in all his :ways. 9 But let the
humble :brother glory in his :exaltation: 10 and the rich, in his :humiliation:
because as a flower of the grass he shall pass away. 11 For once the sun
has arisen with the scorching wind, and it has withered the grass; and its
flower is fallen, and the grace of its :fashion is perished; thus also shall the
rich man fade away in his :goings. 12 Blessed the man that endureth
temptation; for when he hath been approved, he shall receive the crown
of :life, which He promised to them that love him. 13 Let no one say when
tempted [that], I am tempted from God; for :God is unversed in evils, and he
himself tempteth no one: 14 but each is tempted, being drawn away by his
own :lust, and enticed. 15 Then the lust, when it hath conceived, beareth sin:
and the sin fullgrown bringeth forth death. 16 Be not deceived, my beloved
brethren. 17 Every good giving and every perfect gift is from above, coming
down from the Father of the lights, with whom is no variation, neither
shadow cast by turning. 18 With intent he brought us forth by the word of
truth, that we be a kind of firstfruits of his :creatures.
19 Ye know this, my beloved brethren. But let every man be swift
to :hear, slow to :speak, slow to wrath: 20 for man’s wrath worketh not God’s
righteousness. 21 Wherefore putting away all filthiness and over-flowing of
wickedness, receive with meekness the implanted word, which is able to
save your :souls. 22 But be doers of the word, and not hearers only,
deluding yourselves. 23 For if any is hearer of the word and not doer, HE is
like a man beholding his natural face in a mirror: 24 for he beholdeth himself,
and goeth away, and straightway forgetteth what manner of man he was.
25 But who looketh into the perfect law, the law of :liberty, and continueth,
being not a hearer that forgetteth but a doer of work, this man shall be
blessed in his :doing. 26 If any thinketh himself to be religious, not bridling
his own tongue but deceiving his own heart, the religion of this man is vain.
27 Pure religion and undefiled before our :God and Father is this, to visit
orphans and widows in their :affliction, and to keep oneself unspotted from
the world.

Chapter 2
1 My brethren, are you holding the faith of Jesus Christ our :Lord of
the glory with respect of persons? 2 For if a man come into
your :synagogue with a gold ring, in brilliant clothing, and a poor man also
come in mean clothing; 3 and ye have regard to him that weareth the
brilliant :clothing, and say, Sit thou here in a good place; and ye say to the
poor, THOU stand or sit there under my :footstool; 4 did ye not discriminate
among yourselves, and become judges with evil thoughts? 5 Hearken, my
beloved brethren; did not :God choose the poor as to the world to be rich in
faith, and heirs of the kingdom which he promised to them that love him?
6 But YE have dishonored the poor man. Do not the rich oppress you, and
themselves drag you before judgment-seats? 7 Do not THEY blaspheme the
honorable name by which ye are called? 8 Howbeit if ye fulfill the royal law
according to the scripture, Thou shalt love thy :neighbor as thyself, ye do
well: 9 but if ye have respect of persons, ye commit sin, being convicted by
the law as transgressors. 10 For whoever shall keep the whole law, and
stumble in one point, is become guilty of all. 11 For who said, Do not commit
adultery, said also, Do not kill. Now if thou dost not commit adultery, but
killest, thou art become transgressor of the law. 12 So speak, and so do, as
those to be judged by a law of liberty. 13 For the judgment is without mercy
to him that hath shown no mercy: mercy glorieth against judgment.
14 What profits it, my brethren, if one say he hath faith, but have not works?
can the faith save him? 15 If a brother or sister be naked, and lacking
daily :food, 16 and one of you say to them, Go in peace, be warmed and
filled; and ye give them not the things needful to the body; what profits it?
17 Even so the faith, if it have not works, is dead in itself. 18 But one will say,
THOU hast faith, and I have works: show me thy :faith apart from the works,
and I by my :works will show thee the faith. 19 THOU believest that God is
one; thou doest well: the demons also believe, and shudder. 20 But wilt
thou know, O vain man, that the faith apart from the works is barren?
21 Was not Abraham our :father justified by works, in that he offered up
Isaac his :son upon the altar? 22 Thou seest that the faith wrought with the
works, and by the works was the faith perfected; 23 and the scripture was
fulfilled which saith, And he─Abraham─believed :God, and it was reckoned
to him for righteousness; and he was called God’s friend. 24 Ye see that by
works a man is justified, and not by faith alone. 25 And likewise was not also
Raab the harlot justified by works, in that she received the messengers, and
sent them out another way? 26 Just as the body apart from spirit is dead,
even so :faith apart from works is dead.

Chapter 3
1 Be not many teachers, my brethren, knowing that we shall receive
greater condemnation. 2 For in many things we all stumble. If any
stumbleth not in word, the same is a perfect man, able to bridle the
whole :body also. 3 Now if we put the bridles of horses into their mouths
that they may obey us, we turn about their whole :body also. 4 Lo, the ships
also, though they are so great and are driven by rough winds, are turned
about by a very small rudder, whither the impulse of the steersman willeth.
5 Thus the tongue also is a little member, and boasteth great things. Lo,
how much wood is kindled by how small a fire! 6 And the tongue is a fire: the
world of :iniquity among our :members is the tongue, which defileth the
whole body, and setteth on fire the path of :nature, and is set on fire
by :geenna. 7 For every kind of beasts and birds, of things creeping, and in
the sea, is tamed, and hath been tamed by human nature: 8 but the tongue
can no man tame: a restless evil, full of deadly poison. 9 Therewith bless
we the Lord and Father; and therewith curse we :men, who are made after
God’s likeness: 10 out of the same mouth cometh forth blessing and cursing.
My brethren, these things ought not to be thus. 11 Doth the fountain send
forth from the same :opening the sweet and the bitter? 12 can a fig tree, my
brethren, yield olives, or a vine figs? neither can salt water yield sweet.
13 Who is wise and understanding among you? let him show by his
good :conduct his :works in meekness of wisdom. 14 But if ye have bitter
jealousy and faction in your :heart, glory not and lie not against the truth.
15 This is not the wisdom that cometh down from above, but is earthly,
sensual, demonish. 16 For where jealousy is and faction, there is confusion
and every vile deed. 17 But the wisdom from above is first pure, then
peaceable, gentle, easily entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without
variance, without hypocrisy. 18 And the fruit of righteousness is sown in
peace for them that make peace.

Chapter 4
1 Whence wars and whence fightings among you? come they not
hence, of your :pleasures that war in your :members? 2 Ye lust, and have
not: ye kill, and are jealous and cannot obtain: ye fight and war; ye have not,
because ye ask not. 3 Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that
ye may spend it in your :pleasures. 4 Adulteresses, know ye not that the
friendship of the world is enmity with :God? Whoso therefore intends to be
the world’s friend maketh himself God’s enemy. 5 Or think ye that the
scripture saith in vain, Doth the spirit which he made to dwell in us long unto
envying? 6 But he giveth greater grace. Wherefore it saith, :God resisteth
the proud, but giveth grace to the humble. 7 Be subject therefore to :God;
but resist the devil, and he will flee from you. 8 Draw nigh to :God, and he
will draw nigh to you. Cleanse your hands, sinners, and purify your hearts,
ye doubleminded. 9 Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep: let your :laughter
be turned to mourning, and the joy to heaviness. 10 Humble yourselves in
the Lord’s sight and he shall exalt you. 11 Speak not one against
another, brethren. Who speaketh against a brother, or judgeth his :brother,
speaketh against the law, and judgeth the law: but if thou judgest the law,
thou art not doer of the law, but judge. 12 One is lawgiver and judge, he who
can save and destroy: but who art THOU that judgest thy :neighbor?
13 Come now, ye that say, Today or tomorrow we will go into this :city,
and spend a year there, and trade, and get gain: 14 whereas ye know not
what is your :life on the morrow. For ye are a vapor that appeareth for a little,
and then disappeareth. 15 Instead of your saying, If the Lord will, we shall
both live, and do this or that. 16 But now ye glory in your :vauntings: all such
glorying is evil. 17 To him therefore that knoweth to do good, and doeth not,
to him it is sin.

Chapter 5
1 Come now, the rich, weep and howl for your :miseries that are
coming on. 2 Your :riches are corrupted, and your :garments are
moth-eaten. 3 Your :gold and your :silver is rusted; and their :rust shall be
for a testimony against you, and shall eat your :flesh as fire. Ye have laid up
treasure in the last days. 4 Lo, the hire of the laborers who mowed your
lands, which is of you kept back, crieth out: and the cries of them that
reaped have entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth. 5 Ye have lived
delicately on the earth and taken pleasure; ye have nourished your :hearts
in a day of slaughter. 6 Ye have condemned, have killed the righteous One;
he doth not resist you.
7 Be patient therefore, brethren, until the presence of the Lord. Lo,
the husbandman waiteth for the precious fruit of the earth, being patient
over it, until it receive the early and latter rain. 8 Be YE also patient;
establish your :hearts: because the presence of the Lord is at hand. 9
Murmur not, brethren, against one another, that ye be not judged: lo, the
judge standeth before the doors. 10 Take, brethren, for an example
of :suffering and of :patience, the prophets, who spake in the name of the
Lord. 11 Lo, we call them blessed that endured: ye have heard of the
patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord, how that the Lord is full
of pity, and merciful. 12 But above all, my brethren, swear not, neither
by the heaven, nor by the earth, nor any other oath: but let your :yea be yea,
and the nay, nay; that ye fall not under judgment. 13 Is any among you
suffering? let him pray. Is any cheerful? let him sing praise. 14 Is any
among you sick? let him call for the elders of the church; and let them pray
over him, having anointed him with oil in the name of the Lord: 15 and the
prayer of :faith shall save the weary one, and the Lord shall raise him up;
and if he have committed sins, it shall be forgiven him. 16 Confess therefore
your :sins one to another, and pray one for another, that ye be healed. The
supplication of a righteous man availeth much in its working. 17 Elijah was a
man of like passions with us, and he prayed fervently that it might not rain;
and it rained not on the earth for three years and six months. 18 And he
prayed again; and the heaven gave rain, and the earth brought forth
her :fruit. 19 My brethren, if any among you err from the truth, and one
convert him; 20 know that who converteth a sinner from the error of his way
shall save his soul from death, and shall cover a multitude of sins.

OF PETER I

Chapter 1
1 PETER, apostle of Jesus Christ, to the elect sojourners of the Dispersion in
Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, 2 according to the
foreknowledge of God the Father, in sanctification of the Spirit, unto
obedience and sprinkling of Jesus Christ’s blood: Grace to you and peace
be multiplied.
3 Blessed the God and Father of our :Lord Jesus Christ, who
according to his great :mercy begat us again unto a living hope by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, 4 unto an inheritance
incorruptible, and undefiled, and unfading, reserved in the heavens for you,
5 who by God’s power are guarded through faith unto a salvation ready to
be revealed in the last season. 6 Wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for
a little while if need be, put to grief in manifold trials, 7 that the proving of
your :faith, more precious than gold that perisheth though it is proved by fire,
be found unto praise and glory and honor at the revelation of Jesus Christ:
8 whom not seeing ye love; on whom, though now ye see him not, yet
believing, ye rejoice greatly with joy unspeakable and glorified: 9 receiving
the end of the faith, salvation of souls. 10 Concerning which salvation
prophets sought and searched diligently, who prophesied of the grace that
is unto you: 11 searching what time or what manner of season Christ’s Spirit
who was in them did point unto, when he testified beforehand the sufferings
unto Christ, and the glories after them. 12 To whom it was revealed, that not
to themselves, but to you, did they minister the very things, which now have
been announced to you through them that preached the gospel to you by
the Holy Spirit sent forth from heaven; which things angels desire to look
into.
13 Wherefore girding up the loins of your :mind, being sober perfectly
set your hope on the grace that is being brought to you at Jesus Christ’s
revelation; 14 as children of obedience, not being fashioned according to
your former :lusts in your :ignorance: 15 but like as he who called you is holy,
become YE also holy in your whole behavior; 16 because it is written [that],
Ye shall be holy, because I am holy. 17 And if ye call on the Father, who
without respect of persons judgeth according to the work of each, pass the
time of your :sojourning in fear: 18 knowing that ye were redeemed, not with
corruptibles, with silver or gold, from your vain behavior handed down from
your fathers; 19 but with precious blood, as of a lamb blameless and
spotless, of Christ: 20 foreknown indeed before the world’s foundation, but
manifested at the end of the times for your sake, 21 who through him believe
unto God, that raised him from the dead, and gave him glory; so that your
faith and hope be unto God. 22 Having purified your :souls
in :obedience to the truth unto unfeigned love of the brethren, love one
another from the heart fervently: 23 begotten again, not of corruptible seed,
but of incorruptible, through God’s word, which liveth and abideth.
24 Because,
All flesh is as grass,
And all its glory as a flower of grass.
The grass is withering, and the flower is falling:
25 But the Lord’s word abideth unto the age.
And this is the word of good tidings preached unto you.

Chapter 2
1 Having put away therefore all wickedness, and all guile, and hypocrisy,
and envies, and all evil speakings, 2 as newborn babes, long for the
reasonable guileless milk, that ye may grow thereby unto salvation; 3 if ye
have tasted that the Lord is good: 4 unto whom coming, a living stone,
rejected indeed of men, but with God elect, precious, 5 ye also, as living
stones, are being built up a spiritual house, unto a holy priesthood, to offer
up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God through Jesus Christ. 6 Because it
is contained in a scripture,
Lo, I lay in Zion a chief corner stone, elect, precious:
And who believeth on him shall in no wise be shamed.
7 For you therefore that believe is the honor: but for the disbelieving,
A stone which the builders rejected,
The same was made head of the corner;
8 and,
A stone of stumbling, and a rock of offence: who stumble at the word,
being disobedient; whereunto also they were appointed. 9 But ye are an
elect race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for God’s possession,
so that ye may show forth the excellencies of him who called you out of
darkness into his marvellous :light: 10 who once were no people, but now
are God’s people: who had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained
mercy.
11 Beloved, I beseech you as sojourners and pilgrims, to abstain
from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul; 12 having your behavior good
among the nations; that, wherein they speak against you as evil-doers, they
may by the good works, which they behold, glorify :God on visitation day.
13 Be subject to man’s every creation for the Lord’s sake: whether to
king, as supreme; 14 or to governors, as sent through him for vengeance on
evil-doers and for praise on well-doers. 15 For thus is the will of :God, that
by well-doing ye silence the ignorance of foolish :men: 16 as free, and not
using the freedom for a cloak of :wickedness, but as bondmen of God.
17 Honor all men. Love the brotherhood. Fear :God. Hold the king in honor.
18 Ye, the servants, be in subjection to the masters with all fear; not only to
the good and gentle, but also to the froward. 19 For this is grace, if for
conscience toward God one endureth griefs, suffering wrongfully. 20 For
what glory is it, if, when ye sin, and are buffeted, ye are patient? but if, when
ye do well, and suffer for it, ye shall take it patiently, this is grace before God.
21 For hereunto were ye called: because Christ also suffered for you,
leaving you an example, that ye should follow his :steps: 22 who did no sin,
neither was guile found in his :mouth: 23 who, when reviled, reviled not
again; when suffering, threatened not; but committed it to him that judgeth
righteously: 24 who himself carried our :sins in his :body up to the tree, that
we, having died to sins, might live unto righteousness; by whose bruise ye
were healed. 25 For ye were wandering like sheep; but are now returned
unto the Shepherd and overseer of your :souls.

Chapter 3
1 Likewise, wives, be subject to your own :husbands; that, even if
any obey not the word, they be gained without the word by the behavior of
their wives; 2 beholding your chaste :behavior coupled with fear. 3 Whose
adorning let it not be the outward one of braiding the hair, and of wearing
jewels of gold, or of putting on apparel; 4 but the hidden man of the heart, in
the incorruptible apparel of a quiet and gentle spirit, which is in God’s sight
of great price. 5 For thus aforetime the holy women also, who were hoping
in God, adorned themselves, being subject to their own husbands: 6 as
Sarah obeyed :Abraham, calling him Lord: whose children ye are become if
ye do well, and are not put in fear by any terror. 7 Ye, the husbands,
mete out honor to the female vessel as weaker and dwelling with her
according to knowledge, as being also joint-heirs of the grace of life; that
your :prayers be not hindered. 8 :Finally, be all likeminded,
compassionate, loving as brethren, tenderhearted, humbleminded: 9 not
rendering evil for evil, or reviling for reviling; but contrariwise blessing; for
hereunto were ye called, that ye should inherit a blessing. 10 For,
Who would love life,
And see good days,
Let him refrain his :tongue from evil,
And his lips that they speak no guile:
11 And let him turn away from evil, and do good;
Let him seek peace, and pursue it.
12 Because the Lord’s eyes are upon the righteous,
And his ears unto their supplication:
But the Lord’s face is upon those doing evil.
13 And who is he that will harm you, if ye be zealots of what is good?
14 But even if ye should suffer for righteousness’ sake, blessed ye: and fear
not their :fear, neither be troubled; 15 but sanctify in your :hearts the Christ
as Lord: ready always with an answer to every one that asketh you a reason
concerning the hope in you, yet with meekness and fear: 16 having a good
conscience; that, wherein ye are spoken against, they may be shamed who
revile your good behavior in Christ. 17 For it is better, if the will of God
should so will, to suffer as well-doers than as evil-doers. 18 Because Christ
also died for sins once, the righteous for the unrighteous, that he bring us
to :God; put to death in the flesh, but made alive in spirit; 19 in which also he
went and preached to the spirits in prison, 20 that aforetime were
disobedient, when the longsuffering of :God waited in Noah’s days, while
the ark was a preparing, into which few, that is, eight souls, were brought
safely through water: 21 which also in the antitype doth now save you, even
baptism, not the putting away of the filth of flesh, but the interrogation of a
good conscience toward God, through Jesus Christ’s resurrection; 22 who is
at God’s right, gone into heaven; angels and authorities and powers being
subjected to him.

Chapter 4
1 Christ therefore having suffered in the flesh, arm ye yourselves
also with the same mind; for who hath suffered in the flesh hath ceased unto
sins; 2 to live the rest of the time in the flesh no longer to men’s lusts, but to
God’s will. 3 For the time past may suffice to have wrought the desire of the
nations, and to have walked in lasciviousnesses, lusts, winebibbings,
revelings, carousings, and abominable idolatries: 4 wherein they think it
strange that ye run not with them into the same excess of :riot, speaking evil
of you: 5 who shall give account to the one ready to judge the living and
dead. 6 For to this end was the gospel preached also to the dead, that they
might be judged indeed according to men in the flesh, but live according to
God in spirit.
7 But the end of all things is nigh; be therefore of sound mind, and be
sober unto prayers: 8 above all being fervent in your :love among
yourselves; for love covereth a multitude of sins: 9 hospitable one to another
without murmuring: 10 according as each hath received a gift, ministering it
among yourselves, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God; 11 if any
speaketh—as if oracles of God; if any ministereth—as of the strength
which :God supplieth: that in all things :God be glorified through Jesus
Christ, whose is the glory and the dominion unto the ages of the ages.
Amen.
12 Beloved, think not strange the fiery trial among you, which cometh
upon you to prove you, as though aught strange happened to you: 13 but
insomuch as ye are partakers of the sufferings of :Christ, rejoice; that at the
revelation of his :glory also ye may rejoice with exceeding joy. 14 If ye are
reproached in Christ’s name, blessed ye; because the Spirit of :glory
and :of :God resteth upon you. 15 For let none of you suffer as a murderer,
or thief, or evil-doer, or as an inspector of others: 16 but if as a Christian, let
him not be ashamed; but let him glorify :God in this :name. 17 For the
season is come for the judgment to begin at the house of :God: and if first at
us, what the end of them that obey not the gospel of :God? 18 And if the
righteous is scarcely saved, where then shall the ungodly and sinner appear?
19 Wherefore let them also that suffer according to the will of :God commit
their souls in well-doing to a faithful Creator.

Chapter 5
1 The elders therefore among you I exhort, the fellow-elder, and
witness of the sufferings of the Christ, who am also partaker of the glory to
be revealed: 2 Tend the flock of :God which is among you, not of constraint,
but willingly; nor yet for filthy lucre, but of ready mind; 3 neither as lording it
over those allotted you, but being ensamples to the flock. 4 And when the
chief Shepherd shall be manifested, ye shall receive the unfading crown
of :glory. 5 Likewise, ye younger, be subject to elders. Yea, all gird
yourselves with :humility toward one another: for :God resisteth the proud,
but giveth grace to the humble.
6 Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of :God, that
he might exalt you in season; 7 casting all your :anxiety upon him, because
he careth for you. 8 Be sober, watch: the devil, your Adversary, as a roaring
lion, walketh about, seeking to gulp down: 9 whom withstand steadfast in
the faith, knowing that the same :sufferings are being accomplished in
your :brotherhood which is in the world. 10 And the God of all grace, who
called you unto his eternal :glory in Christ, after ye have suffered a little,
shall himself perfect, establish, strengthen you. 11 To him the dominion
unto the ages. Amen.
12 By Silvanus, as I account him, the faithful brother to you I have
written briefly, exhorting, and testifying that this is the true grace of :God:
stand therein. 13 She in Babylon, elect together with you, greeteth you; and
so doth Mark my :son. 14 Greet one another with a kiss of love.
Peace to you all those in Christ.

OF PETER II

Chapter 1
1 SYMEON PETER, bondman and apostle of Jesus Christ, to them that have
obtained an equally precious faith with us in the righteousness of our :God
and Savior Jesus Christ: 2 Grace to you and peace be multiplied in the
knowledge of :God and of Jesus our :Lord; 3 since his divine :power hath
granted to us all things unto life and godliness, through the knowledge of
him that called us through glory and virtue; 4 whereby he hath granted us
the precious and exceeding great promises; that through these ye may
become partakers of the divine nature, having escaped from the corruption
that is in the world by lust. 5 Yea, and for this very cause adding on your
part all diligence, in your :faith supply :virtue; and in :virtue :knowledge;
6 and in :knowledge :self-control; and in self-control :patience; and
in :patience :godliness; 7 and in :godliness brotherly :kindness; and in your
brotherly :kindness :love. 8 For if these things are yours and abound, they
make you to be not idle nor unfruitful unto the knowledge of our :Lord Jesus
Christ. 9 For who lacketh these is blind, short-sighted, having forgotten the
cleansing from his old :sins. 10 Wherefore, brethren, give the more
diligence to make your calling and election sure: for in doing these ye shall
never stumble: 11 for thus shall be richly supplied to you the entrance into
the eternal kingdom of our :Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
12 Wherefore I shall be ready always to remind you of these things,
though ye know and are established in the truth which is with you. 13 And I
think it right, as long as I am in this :tabernacle, to stir you up by reminder;
14 knowing that the putting off of my :tabernacle cometh swiftly, even as
our :Lord Jesus Christ also showed me. 15 Yea, I will give diligence that at
each time ye be able after my :decease to call these things to remembrance.
16 For not by following cunningly devised fables, made we known to you the
power and presence of our :Lord Jesus Christ, but we were eyewitnesses of
HIS :majesty. 17 For he received from God the Father honor and glory,
when such a voice was borne to him by the Majestic Glory, This is
my :beloved :Son, in whom I am well pleased: 18 and this :voice WE heard
borne out of heaven, when we were with him in the holy mount. 19 And we
have the word of prophecy more sure; whereto ye do well to take heed, as
to a lamp shining in a murky place, until day dawn, and the day-star arise in
your :hearts: 20 knowing this first, that no prophecy of scripture is of its own
interpretation. 21 For no prophecy was ever borne by man’s will; but men
spake from God, being borne on by the Holy Spirit.

Chapter 2
1 But false prophets arose also among the people, as among you
also shall be false teachers, who shall privily bring in destructive heresies,
denying even the Master that bought them, bringing upon themselves swift
destruction. 2 And many shall follow their lasciviousnesses; by reason of
whom the way of the truth shall be evil spoken of. 3 And in covetousness
shall they with feigned words make merchandise of you: whose :sentence
now from of old lingereth not, and their :destruction slumbereth not. 4 For
if :God spared not angels that sinned, but tartarizing them committed them
to pits of darkness, to be kept unto judgment; 5 and spared not the ancient
world, but preserved one of eight, Noah, a preacher of righteousness, when
he brought a flood upon a world of the ungodly; 6 and turning the cities of
Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes condemned them, having made them an
example of things coming upon the ungodly; 7 and delivered righteous Lot,
sore distressed by the lascivious conduct of the wicked 8 (for that righteous
man dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing, tormented his righteous
soul from day to day with their lawless deeds): 9 the Lord knoweth how to
deliver the godly out of temptation, and to keep the unrighteous under
punishment unto a day of judgment; 10 but chiefly them that go after flesh in
lust of defilement, and despise lordship. Darers, self-willed, they tremble
not at dignities, railing; 11 whereas angels, being greater in might and power,
bring not railing judgment against them before the Lord. 12 But these, as
creatures without reason, born mere animals for capture and corruption,
railing in matters whereof they are ignorant, shall in their corruption also be
corrupted, 13 suffering wrong as the wage of wrong-doing; men that count
revel by day a pleasure, spots and blemishes, reveling in their :deceivings
while they feast with you; 14 having eyes full of adultery, and that cannot
cease from sin; enticing unsteadfast souls; having a heart practised in
covetousness; children of a curse: 15 forsaking the straight way, they went
astray, having followed the way of :Balaam the son of :Beōr, who loved the
wage of unrighteousness: 16 but was rebuked for his own transgression: a
dumb ass spake with man’s voice and stayed the madness of the prophet.
17 These are waterless springs, and mists driven by a storm; for whom the
blackness of the darkness hath been reserved. 18 For, uttering great
swellings of vanity, they entice in lusts of the flesh by lasciviousness those
who are just escaping from them that live in error; 19 promising them liberty,
while themselves are bondmen of :corruption; for of whom a man is worsted
of the same is he also enslaved. 20 For if, after they have escaped the
defilements of the world through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein and are worsted, their last
are become worse with them than the first. 21 Better were it for them not to
have known the way of :righteousness, than, after knowing it, to turn back
from the holy commandment delivered to them. 22 It has happened to
them :after the true proverb, A dog turning to his :own vomit again, and, A
washed sow to wallowing in mire.

Chapter 3
1 This is now, beloved, a second letter that I write to you; in these I
stir up your sincere mind by reminder; 2 that ye should remember the words
spoken before by the holy prophets, and the commandment of the Lord and
Savior through your apostles: 3 knowing this first, that in the last of the days
mockers shall come with mockery, walking after their own :lusts, 4 and
saying, Where is the promise of his presence? for, since the fathers fell
asleep, all things continue thus from beginning of creation. 5 For this they
willfully forget, that heavens were from of old, and an earth compacted out
of water and through water, by the word of :God; 6 by which means the then
world, overflowed with water, perished: 7 but the present heavens, and the
earth, by the same word have been stored up for fire, being reserved
against a day of judgment and destruction of the ungodly men. 8 But
forget not this one thing, beloved, that one day is with the Lord as a
thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. 9 The Lord is not slack
concerning the promise, as some count slackness; but is longsuffering
toward you, not intending that any perish, but that all come to repentance.
10 But the Lord’s day will come as a thief; in which the heavens shall pass
away with a great noise, and the elements shall be dissolved with fervent
heat, and the earth and the works therein shall be disclosed. 11 Since these
things are thus all to be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in
all holy living and godliness, 12 looking for and hastening the presence of
the day of :God, by reason of which heavens being on fire shall be dissolved,
and elements shall melt with fervent heat? 13 But, according to his :promise,
we look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness.
14 Wherefore, beloved, since ye look for these, give diligence to be found in
peace, spotless and blameless before him. 15 And account that the
longsuffering of our :Lord is salvation; even as our beloved :brother Paul
also, according to the wisdom given him, wrote you; 16 as also in all his
letters, speaking in them of these things; wherein are some hard to be
understood, which the unlearned and unsteadfast wrest, as also the other
scriptures, unto their own :destruction. 17 Ye therefore, beloved, knowing
beforehand, beware lest, carried away with the error of the wicked, ye fall
from your own :steadfastness. 18 But grow in grace and knowledge of
our :Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To him the glory both now and unto the
day of the age.

OF JOHN I

Chapter 1
1 WHAT was from the beginning, what we have heard, what we have seen
with our :eyes, what we beheld, and our :hands handled, concerning the
word of the life 2 (and the life was manifested, and we have seen, and
witness, and declare to you the life, the eternal, which was with the Father,
and was manifested to us); 3 what we have seen and heard declare we to
you also, that ye also may have fellowship with us: yea,
and :OUR :fellowship is with the Father, and with his :Son Jesus Christ:
4 and these things WE write, that our joy be made full.
5 And this is the message which we have heard from him and
announce to you, that :God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. 6 If
we say that we have fellowship with him and walk in the darkness, we lie,
and do not the truth: 7 but if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have
fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus his :Son cleanseth us
from all sin. 8 If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the
truth is not in us. 9 If we confess our :sins, he is faithful and righteous to
forgive us our :sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. 10 If we
say that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his :word is not in us.

Chapter 2
1 My little children, these things I write you that ye may not sin. And if
one sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous:
2 and HE is the propitiation for our :sins; and not for :ours only, but also for
the whole world. 3 And hereby we know that we know him, if we keep
his :commandments. 4 Who saith that I know him, and keepeth not
his :commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in this man; 5 but whoso
keepeth his :word, in him hath truly the love of :God been perfected. Hereby
we know that we are in him: 6 who saith he abideth in him ought himself also
to walk even as HE walked.
7 Beloved, no new commandment write I to you, but an old
commandment which ye had from the beginning: the old :commandment is
the word which ye heard. 8 Again, a new commandment write I to you,
which thing is true in him and in you; because the darkness is passing away,
and the true :light already shineth. 9 Who saith he is in the light and
hateth his :brother, is in the darkness even until now. 10 Who loveth
his :brother abideth in the light, and no stumbling is in him. 11 But who
hateth his :brother is in the darkness, and walketh in the darkness, and
knoweth not whither he goeth, because the darkness hath blinded his :eyes.
12 I write to you, little children, because your :sins are forgiven you for
his :name’s sake. 13 I write to you, fathers, because ye know him who is
from the beginning. I write to you, young men, because ye have overcome
the evil one. I wrote to you, little children, because ye know the Father. 14 I
wrote to you, fathers, because ye know him who is from the beginning. I
wrote to you, young men, because ye are strong, and the word of :God
abideth in you, and ye have overcome the evil one. 15 Love not the world,
neither the things in the world. If any loveth the world, the love of the Father
is not in him. 16 Because all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh and the
lust of the eyes and the vainglory of :life, is not of the Father, but is of the
world. 17 And the world passeth away, and the lust thereof: but who doeth
the will of :God abideth unto the age.
18 Little children, it is the last hour: and as ye heard that antichrist
cometh, even now have many antichrists arisen: whereby we know that it is
the last hour. 19 They went out from us, but were not of us; for if they had
been of us, they would have continued with us: but they went out, that they
might be made manifest that not all are of us. 20 And ye have an anointing
from the Holy One, ye all know—21 I have not written to you because ye
know not the truth, but because ye know it, and because no lie is of the truth.
22 Who is the liar but who denieth that Jesus is the Christ? This is the
antichrist, even who denieth the Father and the Son. 23 Whosoever denieth
the Son, hath not the Father either; who confesseth the Son hath the Father
also. 24 Let what YE heard from the beginning abide in you. If what ye
heard from the beginning abide in you, YE also shall abide in the Son, and in
the Father. 25 And this is the promise which himself promised us, the
life :eternal. 26 These things have I written you concerning those
deceiving you. 27 And the anointing which YE received of him abideth in you,
and ye have no need that one teach you; but as his :anointing teacheth you
concerning all things, and is true, and is no lie, and even as it taught you,
abide in him. 28 And now, little children, abide in him; that, if he be
manifested, we may have boldness, and be not shamed from him at
his :presence. 29 If ye know that he is righteous, know that every one that
doeth :righteousness is begotten of him.

Chapter 3
1 Behold what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us,
that we should be called children of God; and we are. For this cause the
world knoweth us not, because it knew him not. 2 Beloved, now are we
children of God, and it is not yet manifested what we shall be. We know that,
if he shall be manifested, we shall be like him; for we shall see him even as
he is. 3 And every one that hath this :hope on him purifieth himself, even as
HE is pure.
4 Every one that doeth :sin doeth also :lawlessness; and :sin
is :lawlessness. 5 And ye know that he was manifested to take away :sins;
and in him is no sin. 6 Whosoever abideth in him sinneth not: Every one that
doeth sin hath not seen him, neither hath known him. 7 Little children, let no
one lead you astray: who doeth :righteousness is righteous, even as HE is
righteous: 8 who doeth :sin is of the devil; for the devil sinneth from the
beginning. To this end was the Son of :God manifested, that he might
destroy the works of the devil. 9 Every one born of :God doeth no sin,
because his seed abideth in him: and he cannot sin, because he is begotten
of :God. 10 In this the children of :God are manifest, and the children of
the :devil: Every one that doeth not righteousness is not of :God, neither he
that loveth not his :brother. 11 Because this is the message which ye heard
from the beginning, that we should love one another: 12 not as Cain was of
the evil one, and slew his :brother. And wherefore slew he him? Because
his :works were evil, and his :brother’s righteous.
13 Marvel not, brethren, if the world hateth you. 14 WE know that we
have passed out of :death into :life, because we love the brethren. Who
loveth not abideth in :death. 15 Whosoever hateth his :brother is a murderer:
and ye know that no murderer hath eternal life abiding in him.
16 Hereby know we :love, because HE laid down his :life for us: and we
ought to lay down our :lives for the brethren. 17 But whoso hath the goods
of the world, and beholdeth his :brother in need, and shutteth up
his :compassion from him, how doth the love of :God abide in him? 18 Little
children, let us not love in word, neither with the tongue; but in deed and
truth. 19 Hereby shall we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure
our :heart before him: 20 because if our :heart condemn us, :God is greater
than our :heart, and knoweth all things. 21 Beloved, if the heart condemn
not, we have boldness toward :God; 22 and whatever we ask we receive of
him, because we keep his :commandments and do the things pleasing in
his sight. 23 And this is his :commandment, that we should believe on the
name of his :Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, even as he gave us
commandment. 24 And who keepeth his :commandments abideth in him,
and he in him. And hereby we know that he abideth in us, by the Spirit
whom he gave us.

Chapter 4
1 Beloved, believe not every spirit, but prove the spirits, whether they
are of :God; because many false prophets are gone out into the world.
2 Hereby know ye the Spirit of :God: every spirit that confesseth that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh is of :God: 3 and every spirit that confesseth
not :Jesus is not of :God: and this is the spirit of the antichrist, whereof ye
have heard that it cometh; and is now in the world already. 4 YE are
of :God, little children, and have overcome them: because greater is the one
in you than the one in the world. 5 THEY are of the world: therefore speak
they of the world, and the world heareth them. 6 WE are of :God: who
knoweth :God heareth us; who is not of :God heareth us not. From this we
know the spirit of :truth, and the spirit of :error.
7 Beloved, let us love one another: for :love is of God; and every one
that loveth is begotten of :God, and knoweth :God. 8 Who loveth not
knoweth not :God; for :God is love. 9 Herein was the love of :God
manifested in us, that :God hath sent his :only begotten :Son into the world
that we might live through him. 10 Herein is :love, not that WE have
loved :God, but that HE loved us, and sent his :Son as propitiation for
our :sins. 11 Beloved, if :God so loved us, we also ought to love one
another. 12 No one hath ever beheld God: if we love one another, :God
abideth in us, and his :love is perfected in us: 13 hereby we know that we
abide in him and he in us, because he hath given us of his :Spirit. 14 And we
have beheld and witness that the Father hath sent the Son as Savior of the
world. 15 Whoso shall confess that Jesus Christ is the Son of :God, :God
abideth in him, and he in :God. 16 And WE know and have believed the love
which God hath in us. :God is love; and who abideth in :love abideth
in :God, and :God abideth in him. 17 Herein is :love made perfect with us,
that we may have boldness in the day of :judgment; because as HE is, even
so are WE in this :world. 18 No fear is in :love: but :perfect love casteth out
the fear, because the fear hath punishment; and who feareth is not
perfected in :love. 19 WE love, because HE first loved us. 20 If one say that
I love :God, and hateth his :brother, he is a liar: for who loveth not
his :brother whom he hath seen, cannot love :God whom he hath not seen.
21 And this :commandment we have from him, that who loveth :God love
his :brother also.

Chapter 5
1 Every one that believeth that Jesus is the Christ is begotten of :God:
and every one that loveth the Begetter loves the one begotten of him.
2 Hereby we know that we love the children of :God, when we love :God and
do his :commandments. 3 For this is the love of :God, that we keep
his :commandments: and his :commandments are not grievous, 4 because
whatsoever is begotten of :God overcometh the world: and this is the victory
that hath overcome the world, our :faith. 5 And who is he that overcometh
the world, but who believeth that Jesus is the Son of :God ? 6 This is he that
came by water and blood, Jesus Christ; not with the water only, but with the
water and with the blood. 7 And it is the Spirit that witnesseth, because the
Spirit is the truth. 8 Because the witnessing ones are three: the Spirit, and
the water, and the blood: and the three agree in one. 9 If we receive the
witness of :men, the witness of :God is greater: because the witness of :God
is this that he hath witnessed concerning his :Son. 10 Who believeth unto
the Son of :God hath the witness in himself: who believeth not :God hath
made him a liar; because he hath not believed unto the witness that :God
hath witnessed concerning his :Son. 11 And the witness is this, that :God
gave us eternal life, and this :life is in his :Son. 12 Who hath the Son hath
the life; who hath not the Son of :God hath not the life. 13 These things
have I written you, that ye may know that ye have eternal life, to those that
believe unto the name of the Son of :God. 14 And this is the boldness which
we have toward him, that, if we ask anything according to his :will, he
heareth us; 15 and if we know that he heareth us whatsoever we ask, we
know that we have the petitions which we have asked of him. 16 If any see
his :brother sinning a sin not unto death, he shall ask, and shall give him life,
to them that sin not unto death. There is a sin unto death: not concerning
this I say that he make request. 17 All unrighteousness is sin: and there is
sin not unto death. 18 We know that every one :begotten of :God
sinneth not; but who was begotten of :God keepeth himself, and the evil one
toucheth him not. 19 We know that we are of :God, and the whole world lieth
in the evil one. 20 And we know that the Son of :God is come, and hath
given us an understanding, that we may know the true one, and we are in
the true one, in his :Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and eternal life.
21 Little children, guard yourselves from the idols.

OF JOHN II

Chapter 1
1 THE elder to elect Kyria and her :children, whom I love in truth; and not I
only, but also all that know the truth; 2 for the truth’s sake which abideth in
us, and shall be with us unto the age: 3 Grace, mercy, peace shall be with
us, from God the Father, and from Jesus Christ the Son of the Father, in
truth and love.
4 I rejoice greatly that I have found certain of thy :children walking in
the truth, even as we received commandment from the Father. 5 And now I
request thee, Kyria, not as though I wrote to thee a new commandment, but
which we had from the beginning, that we love one another. 6 And this
is :love, that we should walk after his :commandments. This is the
commandment, even as ye heard from the beginning, that ye should walk in
it. 7 For many deceivers are gone forth into the world: they that confess not
Jesus Christ coming in the flesh. This is the deceiver and the antichrist.
8 Look to yourselves, that ye lose not what things we have wrought, but that
ye receive a full reward. 9 Whosoever goeth onward and abideth not in the
teaching of the Christ, hath not God: who abideth in the teaching, the same
hath both the Father and the Son. 10 If any cometh unto you, and bringeth
not this :teaching, receive him not into your house, and give him no greeting:
11 for who giveth him greeting partaketh in his :evil :works.
12 Having many things to write to you, I would not with paper and ink:
but hope to come unto you, and speak face to face, that your :joy be made
full. 13 The children of thine :elect :sister salute thee.

OF JOHN III

Chapter 1
1 THE elder to Gaius the beloved, whom I love in truth.
2 Beloved, I pray that in all things thou prosper and be in health, even
as thy :soul prospereth. 3 For I rejoiced greatly when brethren came and
witnessed to thy :truth, even as THOU walkest in the truth. 4 No greater
grace have I than these things, to hear of my :children walking in the truth.
5 Beloved, thou doest a faithful work in whatever thou doest toward the
brethren and strangers withal; 6 who witnessed to thy :love before the
church: whom thou wilt do well to set forward on their journey worthily
of :God : 7 for they went forth for the Name’s sake, taking nothing of the
Gentiles. 8 WE therefore ought to welcome :such, that we may become
fellow-workers for the truth.
9 I wrote somewhat unto the church: but Diotrephēs, who loveth
pre-eminence among them, receiveth us not. 10 Therefore, if I come, I will
bring to remembrance his :works which he doeth, prating against us with
wicked words: and not content therewith, neither himself receiveth the
brethren, and them that would he forbiddeth and casteth out of the church.
11 Beloved, imitate not :evil, but :good. The doer of good is of :God;
the doer of evil hath not seen :God. 12 Demetrius hath the witness of all,
and of the truth itself: yea, WE also bear witness; and thou knowest that
our :witness is true.
13 I had many things to write thee, but I am unwilling to write thee
with ink and pen: 14 but I hope shortly to see thee, and we shall speak face
to face. Peace to thee. The friends salute thee. Salute the friends by
name.

OF JUDE

Chapter 1
1 JUDE, bondman of Jesus Christ, and brother of James, to those called,
beloved in God the Father, and kept for Jesus Christ: 2 Mercy to you and
peace and love be multiplied.
3 Beloved, while I was giving all diligence to write you of our
common :salvation, I was constrained to write you exhorting to contend
earnestly for the faith once for all delivered to the saints. 4 For certain men
have crept in privily, who were of old written of beforehand unto
this :condemnation, ungodly, turning the grace of our :God into
lasciviousness, and denying the only Master and our Lord, Jesus Christ.
5 Now I desire to remind you, though ye know all things once for all, that the
Lord, having saved a people out of Egypt land, the second time destroyed
them that believed not. 6 And angels that kept not their own :principality, but
left their proper habitation, he hath kept in everlasting bonds under
darkness unto judgment of the great day. 7 Even as Sodom and Gomorrah,
and the cities about them, having in like manner with these given them-
selves to fornication and gone after strange flesh, are set forth as an
example of eternal fire, suffering punishment. 8 Yet in like manner
these also in their dreamings defile the flesh, and set at nought dominion,
and rail at dignities. 9 But Michaēl the archangel, when contending with the
devil he disputed about the body of :Moses, durst not bring against him a
railing judgment, but said, The Lord rebuke thee. 10 But these rail at
whatsoever they know not: and what they understand naturally, like the
creatures without reason. in these things are they corrupted. 11 Woe to
them! for they went in the way of :Cain, and ran riotously in the error
of :Balaam for hire, and perished in the gainsaying of :Korah. 12 These are
they who are hidden rocks in your :love-feasts when they feast with you,
that without fear feed themselves; clouds without water carried along by
winds; autumn trees without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots;
13 wild sea waves, foaming out their own shames; wandering stars, for
whom the blackness of :darkness hath been reserved unto the age.
14 And to these also Enoch prophesied, seventh from Adam, saying, Lo, the
Lord came with his holy myriads, 15 to execute judgment upon all, and to
convict all the ungodly of all their :works of ungodliness which they have
ungodly wrought, and of all the hard things which ungodly sinners have
spoken against him. 16 These are murmurers, complainers, walking
after their :lusts (and their :mouth speaketh great swelling words), showing
respect of persons for the sake of advantage.
17 But YE beloved, remember the words :spoken before by the
apostles of our :Lord Jesus Christ; 18 that they said to you, In the last time
mockers shall be, walking after their own :ungodly lusts. 19 These are they
who make separations, having only soul, not having Spirit. 20 But ye,
beloved, building up yourselves on your most holy :faith, praying in the Holy
Spirit, 21 keep yourselves in God’s love, looking for the mercy of our :Lord
Jesus Christ unto eternal life. 22 And on some have mercy, who are in
doubt; and 23 save, snatching them out of fire; and on some have mercy
with fear; hating even the garment spotted by the flesh.
24 Now to him that is able to guard you from stumbling, and to set you
before the presence of his :glory blameless in exceeding joy, 25 to the only
God our Savior, through Jesus Christ our :Lord, be glory, majesty, dominion
and authority, before every :age, and now and unto all the ages. Amen.

UNTO THE ROMANS

Chapter 1
1 PAUL, bondman of Jesus Christ, a called apostle, separated unto God’s
gospel, 2 which he promised afore through his :prophets in the holy
scriptures, 3 concerning his :Son, who came to be of David’s seed
according to the flesh, 4 determined as the Son of God with power,
according to the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection of the dead: even
Jesus Christ our :Lord, 5 through whom we received grace and apostleship,
unto obedience of faith among all the nations, for his :name’s sake; 6 among
whom are ye also Jesus Christ’s called ones: 7 to all that are in Rome,
beloved of God, called saints: Grace to you and peace from God our Father
and the Lord Jesus Christ.
8 First, then, I thank my :God through Jesus Christ for you all, that
your :faith is being proclaimed throughout the whole world. 9 For :God is my
witness, whom I serve in my :spirit in the gospel of his :Son, how
unceasingly I make mention of you always in my :prayers 10 requesting, if
by any means now at length I may be prospered in the will of :God to come
unto you. 11 For I long to see you, that I may impart to you some spiritual
gift, unto your being established; 12 and this is that I with you be comforted
in you, each by our :mutual faith, both yours and mine. 13 And I would not
have you ignorant, brethren, that oft I purposed to come unto you (and was
hindered :hitherto), that I might have some fruit in you also, even as in the
rest of the nations. 14 I am debtor both to Greeks and to Barbarians,
both to wise and foolish. 15 So, as much as in me is, I am ready to preach
the gospel to you also :in Rome. 16 For I am not ashamed of the gospel: for
it is God’s power unto salvation to every :believer; to Jew first, also to Greek.
17 For herein is being revealed God’s righteousness from faith unto faith: as
it is written, But the righteous man shall live by faith.
18 For God’s wrath is being revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold down the truth in
unrighteousness; 19 because what is known of :God is manifest in them;
for :God manifested it to them. 20 For his :invisible things since the world’s
creation are clearly seen, being perceived through the things made, both his
everlasting :power and divinity; that they be without excuse: 21 because,
knowing :God, they glorified him not as God, neither gave thanks; but
became vain in their :reasonings, and their senseless :heart was darkened.
22 Professing to be wise, they became fools, 23 and changed the glory of
the incorruptible God for a likeness of an image of corruptible man, and of
birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping things. 24 Wherefore :God
gave them up in the lusts of their :hearts unto uncleanness, that
their :bodies be dishonored among them: 25 in that they exchanged the truth
of :God for the lie, and worshipped and served the creature rather than the
Creator, who is blessed unto the ages. Amen. 26 For this cause God gave
them up unto passions of dishonor: for both their females changed the
natural use into what is against nature: 27 and also the males, leaving the
natural use of the female, burned in their :lust one toward another, males
with males working the unseemliness, and receiving in themselves the
needful recompense of their :error. 28 And even as they refused to
have :God in their knowledge, :God gave them up unto a reprobate mind, to
do the things unbecoming; 29 filled with all unrighteousness, wickedness,
covetousness, malice; full of envy, murder, strife, guile, malignity;
whisperers, 30 backbiters, haters of God, insolent, haughty, boastful,
inventors of evils, disobedient to parents, 31 without understanding,
covenant-breakers, without natural affection, merciless: 32 they who,
knowing the ordinance of :God, that who practise the such are worthy of
death, not only do them, but also consent with those practising them.

Chapter 2
1 Wherefore thou art without excuse, O man, whoso thou that
judgest: for wherein thou judgest the other, thou condemnest thyself; for
thou that judgest dost practise the same things. 2 And we know that the
judgment of :God is according to truth against those practising the such.
3 And reckonest thou this, O man, who judgest those practising the such
and doest them, that THOU shalt escape the judgment of :God? 4 Or
despisest thou the riches of his :goodness and :forbearance
and :longsuffering, not knowing that the goodness of :God leadeth thee to
repentance? 5 but after thy :hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up for
thyself wrath in the day of wrath and revelation of :God’s righteous judgment,
6 who will render to each according to his :works: 7 to them that by patience
in well-doing seek for glory and honor and incorruption, eternal life: 8 but to
them that are factious, and obey not the truth, but
obey :unrighteousness—wrath and indignation, 9 tribulation and anguish,
upon every soul of man that worketh the evil, of Jew first, and also of Greek;
10 but glory and honor and peace to every one that worketh the good, to
Jew first, and also to Greek: 11 for there is no respect of persons with :God.
12 For as many as have sinned without law shall also perish without law:
and as many as have sinned under law shall be judged by law; 13 for not the
hearers of law are just before :God, but the doers of law shall be justified;
14 (for when nations that have no law do by nature the things of the law,
these, not having law, are law to themselves; 15 in that they show the work
of the law writ in their :hearts, their :conscience bearing witness therewith,
and their thoughts one with another accusing or else excusing;) 16 in the
day when :God judgeth the secrets of :men, according to my :gospel,
through Jesus Christ.
17 But if thou bearest the name of Jew, and restest upon law, and
gloriest in God, 18 and knowest the Will, and approvest the excellent things,
being instructed out of the law, 19 and art confident that thou thyself art a
guide of the blind, a light of those in darkness, 20 a corrector of the foolish, a
teacher of babes, having in the law the form of the knowledge and of the
truth; 21 who teachest therefore another, teachest thou not thyself? who
preachest not to steal, dost thou steal? 22 who sayest not to commit
adultery, dost thou commit adultery? who abhorrest :idols, dost thou rob
temples? 23 who gloriest in law, through the transgression of the law
dishonorest God? 24 For the name of :God is blasphemed among the
nations because of you, even as it is written. 25 For circumcision indeed
profiteth, if thou be doer of law: but if thou be transgressor of law,
thy :circumcision is become uncircumcision. 26 If therefore the
uncircumcision keep the ordinances of the law, shall not his :uncircumcision
be reckoned for circumcision? 27 and the uncircumcision by nature, if it fulfill
the law, shall judge thee, who with letter and circumcision art transgressor
of law. 28 For the Jew is not one manifestly, neither is circumcision
manifestly in the flesh; 29 but the one in :secret is a Jew; and circumcision is
of the heart, in spirit not in letter; whose :praise is not of men, but of :God.

Chapter 3
1 What the advantage then of the Jew, or what the profit of
circumcision? 2 Much every way: for first indeed, that they were entrusted
with the oracles of :God. 3 For what if some disbelieved? shall
their :unbelief make void the faithfulness of :God? 4 Be it not so: yea,
let :God be found true, but every man a liar; as it is written,
That thou mightest be justified in thy :words,
And mightest prevail at thy judging.
5 But if our :unrighteousness commendeth God’s righteousness, what shall
we say? Is :God unrighteous who visiteth with :wrath? (I speak after man’s
manner.) 6 Be it not so: for then how shall :God judge the world? 7 But if the
truth of :God by my :lie abounded unto his :glory, why am I also still judged
as sinner? 8 and why not (as we are slanderously reported, and as some
affirm that we say [that]), Let us do the evils, that :good may come?
whose :condemnation is just.
9 What then? are we the better? Not at all: for we before laid to the
charge both of Jews and Greeks, that all are under sin; 10 as it is written
[that],
None is righteous, no, not one;
11 There is none that understandeth,
There is none that seeketh after :God;
12 All have turned aside, are together become unprofitable;
There is none that doeth good, there is not so much as one:
13 Their :throat is an open sepulchre;
With their :tongues they have used deceit:
Poison of asps is under their :lips:
14 Whose :mouth is full of cursing and bitterness:
15 Their :feet swift to shed blood;
16 Destruction and misery in their :ways;
17 And the way of peace have they not known:
18 No fear of God is before their :eyes.
19 Now we know that whatever things the law saith, it speaketh to those
under the law; that every mouth be stopped, and all the world become under
judgment before :God: 20 because by works of law shall no flesh be justified
in his sight; for through law is knowledge of sin.
21 But now apart from law God’s righteousness hath been
manifested, being witnessed by the law and the prophets; 22 even God’s
righteousness through faith in Jesus Christ unto all that believe; for there is
no distinction; 23 for all have sinned, and fall short of the glory of :God;
24 being justified freely by his :grace through the redemption :in Christ
Jesus: 25 whom :God set forth as propitiation, through faith, in his :blood, to
show his :righteousness because of the passing over of the sins done afore,
in the forbearance of :God; 26 for the showing, I say, of his :righteousness at
the present season: that HE might be just, and justifier of him that hath faith
in Jesus. 27 Where then the glorying? It is excluded. By what manner
of law? of the works? in no wise; but by a law of faith. 28 For we reckon a
man is justified by faith apart from works of law. 29 Or is he :God of Jews
only? not of the nations also? in no wise of nations also? Yea, of nations
also 30 if indeed :God is one, who shall justify circumcision out of faith, and
uncircumcision through the faith. 31 Do we then make law void through the
faith? Be it not so: nay, we establish law.

Chapter 4
1 What then shall we say that Abraham, our :forefather, according to
the flesh, hath found? 2 For if Abraham was justified by works, he hath
whereof to glory; but not toward God. 3 For what saith the scripture? And
he—Abraham—believed :God, and it was reckoned to him for
righteousness. 4 Now to him that worketh, the reward is not reckoned as of
grace, but as of debt. 5 But to him that worketh not, but believeth on him
that justifieth the ungodly one, his :faith is reckoned for righteousness.
6 Even as David also pronounceth :blessing upon the man, to whom :God
reckoneth righteousness apart from works, 7 saying,
Blessed they whose :iniquities are forgiven,
And whose :sins are covered.
8 Blessed the man to whom the Lord will not reckon sin.
9 Is this :blessing therefore upon the circumcision, or upon the
uncircumcision also? for we say, To :Abraham the faith was reckoned for
righteousness. 10 How then was it reckoned? when he was in circumcision,
or in uncircumcision? Not in circumcision, but in uncircumcision: 11 and he
received a sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith
which was through the uncircumcision: that he be father of all them that
believe, through uncircumcision, that the righteousness might be reckoned
to them; 12 and father of circumcision to them who not only are of
circumcision, but who also walk in the steps of our :father Abraham’s :faith
which he had in uncircumcision. 13 For not through law was the
promise to :Abraham or to his :seed that he should be heir of the world, but
through righteousness of faith. 14 For if they of the law are heirs, the faith is
made empty and the promise is made void: 15 for the law worketh wrath; but
where no law is, neither is transgression. 16 For this cause it is of faith,
that it be according to grace; to the end that the promise be sure to all the
seed; not to that only of the law, but to that also which is of Abraham’s faith
(who is father of us all 17 as is written, [that], I have made thee father of
many nations), before him whom he believed, God, who maketh alive the
dead, and calleth the things that are not, as though they are. 18 Who in
hope believed against hope, to the end that he become father of many
nations, according to what had been spoken, So shall thy :seed be. 19 And
without weakening in the faith he considered his own :body now as good as
dead (being about a hundred years old), and the deadness of the womb of
Sarah; 20 yet, looking unto the promise of :God, he doubted not
through :unbelief, but waxed strong through :faith, giving glory to :God,
21 and being fully assured that what he had promised, he was able also to
perform. 22 Wherefore also it was reckoned to him for righteousness.
23 Now it was not written for his sake alone, that it was reckoned to him;
24 but for ours also, to whom it shall be reckoned, who believe on him that
raised Jesus our :Lord from the dead, 25 who was delivered up for
our :trespasses, and was raised for our :justification.

Chapter 5
1 Justified therefore out of faith, let us have peace with :God through
our :Lord Jesus Christ; 2 through whom also we have had the access by
faith into this :grace wherein we stand; and let us rejoice in hope of the glory
of :God. 3 And not only so, but let us also rejoice in :tribulations: knowing
that :tribulation worketh patience; 4 and patience, approvedness; and
approvedness, hope: 5 and :hope putteth not to shame; because the love
of :God hath been shed abroad in our :hearts through the Holy Spirit :given
us: 6 Seeing that, we being yet weak, in due season Christ died for us
ungodly. 7 For scarcely for a righteous man will one die: for peradventure
for the good man some one would even dare to die. 8 But :God
commendeth his own :love toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners,
Christ died for us. 9 Much rather therefore, justified now by his :blood, shall
we be saved from the wrath through him. 10 For if, being enemies, we were
reconciled to :God through the death of his :Son, much rather, reconciled,
shall we be saved by his :life; 11 and not only so, but also rejoicing in :God
through our :Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received the
reconciliation.
12 Therefore, as through one man :sin entered into the world,
and :death through :sin; and so :death passed unto all men, for that all
sinned:—13 for until the law sin was in the world; but sin is not put to account
when there is no law. 14 But :death reigned from Adam till Moses, even
over them that had not sinned after the likeness of the transgression of
Adam, who is a figure of the one to come. 15 But not as the trespass, thus
also the free gift. For if by the trespass of the one the many died, much
rather did the grace of :God, and the gift by grace which is of the one man,
Jesus Christ, abound unto the many. 16 And not as through the one that
sinned, is the gift: for the judgment—it came of one unto condemnation, but
the free gift came of many trespasses unto justification. 17 For if, by the
trespass of the one, :death reigned through the one; much rather shall they
that receive the abundance of grace and of the gift of :righteousness reign in
life through the one, Jesus Christ. 18 So then as through one trespass, it is
unto all men unto condemnation; even so through one act of righteousness
it is unto all men unto justification of life. 19 For just as through the
disobedience of the one man the many were made sinners, thus also
through the obedience of the one shall the many be made righteous. 20 And
law came in besides, that the trespass abound; but where :sin
abounded, :grace surpassed far more: 21 that, just as :sin reigned in :death,
thus also might :grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life through
Jesus Christ our :Lord.

Chapter 6
1 What shall we say then? Shall we continue in :sin, that :grace may
abound? 2 Be it not so. We who died to :sin, how shall we any longer live
therein? 3 Or are ye ignorant that all we who were baptized into Christ
Jesus were baptized into his :death? 4 We were buried therefore with him
through :baptism into :death: that just as Christ was raised from the dead
through the glory of the Father, thus we also might walk in newness of life.
5 For if we have become like-natured with him in the likeness of his :death,
we shall yet be also in the likeness of the resurrection; 6 knowing this, that
our old :man was crucified with him, that the body of :sin be done away, that
we no longer be in bondage to :sin; 7 for who hath died is justified from :sin.
8 But if we died with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with him;
9 knowing that Christ raised from the dead dieth no more; death no more
lords it over him. 10 For in that he died, he died unto sin once for all: but in
that he liveth, he liveth to :God. 11 Thus ye also reckon yourselves to be
dead indeed to sin, but alive to :God in Christ Jesus. 12 Let not :sin
therefore reign in your mortal :body, that ye should obey the lusts thereof:
13 neither be presenting your :members to sin as weapons of
unrighteousness; but present yourselves to :God, as alive from the dead,
and your :members as weapons of righteousness to :God. 14 For sin shall
not lord it over you: for ye are not under law, but under grace. 15 What
then? shall we sin, because we are not under law, but under grace? Be it
not so. 16 Know ye not, that to whom ye are presenting yourselves as
bondmen unto obedience, his bondmen ye are whom ye are obeying;
whether of sin unto death or of obedience unto righteousness? 17 But
thanks to :God, that, ye were bondmen of :sin, but became obedient from
the heart to what pattern of teaching ye were delivered; 18 and, freed
from :sin, ye came into bondage of :righteousness. 19 I speak after men’s
manner because of the infirmity of your :flesh: for as ye presented
your :members enslaved to :uncleanness, and to :lawlessness
unto :lawlessness, thus now present your :members enslaved
to :righteousness unto sanctification. 20 For when ye were bondmen of :sin,
ye were free as to :righteousness. 21 What fruit therefore had ye then in the
things ye are now ashamed of? for the end of those is death. 22 But now,
freed from :sin and enslaved to :God, ye have your :fruit unto sanctification,
and the end eternal life. 23 For the wages of :sin is death; but the free gift
of :God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our :Lord.

Chapter 7
1 Or are ye ignorant, brethren (for I speak to those who know law),
that the law lords it over the man so long a time as he liveth? 2 For the
woman under a husband is bound by law to the living husband; but if the
husband should die, she is discharged from the law of the husband. 3 So
then if, while the husband liveth, she become another man’s, she shall be
called an adulteress: but if the husband die, she is free from the law, so that
she is no adulteress, though she be joined to another man. 4 So that, my
brethren, ye also were made dead to the law through the body of :Christ;
that ye should become another’s, his who was raised from the dead, that we
might bear fruit unto :God. 5 For when we were in the flesh, the passions of
the sins (those through the law) wrought in our :members to bear fruit
unto :death. 6 But now we have been discharged from the law, having died
wherein we were held; so that we are bondmen in newness of spirit, and not
in oldness of letter. 7 What shall we say then? Is the law sin? Be it not
so. But neither had I known :sin, except through law: for I had not
known :lust, except the law had said, Thou shalt not lust: 8 but :sin, taking
occasion through the commandment wrought in me every lust: for apart
from law sin is dead. 9 And I was alive apart from law once: but when the
commandment came, :sin revived, and I died; 10 and the commandment,
which was unto life, this I found unto death: 11 for :sin, taking occasion,
through the commandment beguiled me, and through it slew me. 12 So that
the law is holy, and the commandment holy, and righteous, and good.
13 Did then the good become death unto me? Be it not so. But :sin, that it
appear sin, by working death unto me through the good;—that through the
commandment :sin might become exceeding sinful. 14 For we know that
the law is spiritual: but I am carnal, sold under :sin. 15 For what I work I
know not: for not what I would, that I practise; but what I hate, that I do.
16 But if what I would not, that I do, I consent unto the law that it is good.
17 And now it is no more I that work it, but :sin which dwelleth in me. 18 For
I know that in me, that is, in my :flesh, dwelleth no good: for to will is present
with me, but to work the good, no. 19 For the good which I would I do not:
but the evil which I would not,—this I practise. 20 But if what I would not,
that I do, it is no more I that work it, but :sin which dwelleth in me. 21 I find
then the law, that, to me who would do the good, to me the evil is present.
22 For I delight in the law of :God after the inward man: 23 but I see a
different law in my :members, warring against the law of my :mind, and
bringing me into captivity in the law of :sin which is in my :members.
24 Wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me out of the body of
this :death? 25 But thanks to :God through Jesus Christ our :Lord. So then
I myself with the mind, indeed, serve God’s law; but with the flesh sin’s law.

Chapter 8
1 There is therefore now no condemnation to those in Christ Jesus.
2 For the law of the Spirit of the life in Christ Jesus hath freed thee from the
law of :sin and of :death. 3 For what the law could not do, wherein it was
weak through the flesh, :God, sending his own :Son in likeness of flesh of
sin and for sin, condemned :sin in the flesh: 4 that the ordinance of the law
be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. 5 For they
that are after the flesh mind the things of the flesh; but they that are after the
Spirit, those of the Spirit. 6 For the mind of the flesh is death; but the mind of
the Spirit is life and peace: 7 because the mind of the flesh is enmity
unto :God; for it is not subject to the law of :God, neither indeed can it be:
8 and they that are in the flesh cannot please God. 9 But YE are not in the
flesh but in the Spirit, if so be that God’s Spirit dwelleth in you. But if any
hath not Christ’s Spirit he is none of his. 10 And if Christ is in you, the body
is indeed dead because of sin; but the spirit is life because of righteousness.
11 But if the Spirit of him that raised :Jesus from the dead dwelleth in you,
who raised Christ Jesus from the dead shall make alive also your
mortal :bodies through his :Spirit that dwelleth in you.
12 So then, brethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live after the
flesh: 13 for if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if by the Spirit ye put to
death the doings of the body, ye shall live. 14 For as many as are led by
God’s Spirit, these are God’s sons. 15 For ye received not a spirit of
bondage again unto fear; but ye received a spirit of adoption, whereby we
cry, Abba, :Father. 16 The Spirit himself beareth witness with our :spirit, that
we are God’s children: 17 and if children, also heirs; heirs namely of God,
and joint-heirs with Christ; if so be that we suffer with him, that we be also
glorified with him. 18 For I reckon that the sufferings of the present
season are not worthy to be compared with the coming glory to be revealed
toward us. 19 For the earnest expectation of the creation awaiteth the
revelation of the sons of :God. 20 For the creation was subjected to :vanity,
not of its own will, but by reason of him who subjected it, in hope 21 that the
creation itself also shall be freed from the bondage of :corruption into the
freedom of the glory of the children of :God. 22 For we know that the whole
creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until :now. 23 And not only
so, but ourselves also, who have the firstfruits of the Spirit, WE ourselves
also groan within ourselves, awaiting our adoption, the redemption of
our :body. 24 For in hope were we saved: but hope seen is not hope: for
who hopeth for what he seeth? 25 But if we hope for what we see not, we
await it with patience. 26 And in like manner the Spirit also helpeth
our :infirmity: for we know not how to pray as we ought; but the Spirit himself
intercedeth mightily for us with groanings unutterable; 27 and who
searcheth the hearts knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit, because he
intercedeth for the saints according to God. 28 And we know that to them
that love :God :God worketh all things together for good, to those who are
called according to his purpose. 29 For whom he foreknew, he also
foreordained to be conformed to the image of his :Son, that he be first-born
among many brethren: 30 and whom he foreordained, them he also called:
and whom he called, them he also justified: and whom he justified, them he
also glorified. 31 What then shall we say unto these things? If :God is
for us, who is against us? 32 Who at least spared not his own :Son, but
delivered him up for us all, how shall he not also with him freely give us all
the things? 33 Who shall bring a charge against God’s elect? It is God that
justifieth; 34 who is he that condemneth? It is Christ Jesus that died, yea
rather, was raised from the dead, who is at :God’s right, who also
intercedeth for us. 35 Who shall separate us from the love of the Christ?
tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or
sword? 36 Even as it is written [that],
For thy sake we are killed all the day long;
We were accounted as sheep for slaughter.
37 But in all these we more than conquer through him that loved us. 38 For
I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities,
nor things present, nor things to come, nor powers, 39 nor height, nor depth,
nor any other creation, shall be able to separate us from the love of :God,
which is in Christ Jesus our :Lord.

Chapter 9
1 I say truth in Christ, I lie not, my :conscience bearing witness with
me in the Holy Spirit, 2 that I have great sorrow and unceasing pain in
my :heart. 3 For I could wish that I myself were anathema from the Christ for
my :brethren’s sake, my :kinsmen according to the flesh: 4 who are
Israelites; whose is the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the
giving of the law, and the worship, and the promises; 5 whose are the
fathers, and of whom is the Christ as concerning the flesh, who is over all,
God blessed unto the ages. Amen. 6 But not as though the word of :God
hath failed. For they are not all Israel, that are of Israel: 7 neither, because
they are Abraham’s seed, are all children: but, In Isaac shall thy seed be
called. 8 That is, the children of the flesh—they are not children of :God; but
the children of the promise are reckoned for a seed. 9 For the word of
promise is this, According to this :season will I come, and :Sarah shall have
a son. 10 And not only so; but Rebecca also having conceived by one, by
our father :Isaac—11 for the children being not yet born, neither having done
aught good or bad, that the purpose of :God according to election might
stand, not of works, but of him that calleth, 12 it was said to her [that], The
elder shall serve the younger. 13 Even as it is written, :Jacob I loved,
but :Esau I hated.
14 What shall we say therefore? Is there unrighteousness with :God?
Be it not so. 15 For he saith to :Moses, I will have mercy on whom I have
mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I have compassion. 16 So then
it is :not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that hath
mercy. 17 For the scripture saith to :Pharaoh [that], For this very thing did I
raise thee up, that I might show in thee my :power, and that my :name be
published abroad in all the earth. 18 So then he hath mercy on whom he will,
and whom he will he hardeneth. 19 Thou wilt say then to me, Why
blameth he still? For who withstandeth his :purpose? 20 Nay but, O man,
who art thou that repliest against :God? Shall the thing formed say to him
that formed it, Why madest thou me thus? 21 Or hath not the potter
authority over the clay, from the same lump to make one part a vessel unto
honor, and another unto dishonor? 22 What if :God, willing to show :wrath,
and to make his :power known, bore with much longsuffering vessels of
wrath fitted unto destruction: 23 that he might make known the riches of
his :glory upon vessels of mercy, which he afore prepared unto glory, 24 us,
whom he also called, not from Jews only, but also from the nations? 25 As
he saith also in :Hosea,
I will call the one not my people, my people;
And the one not beloved, beloved,
26 And it shall be, that in the place where it was said to them, Ye are
not my people,
There shall they be called sons of the living God.
27 And Isaiah crieth concerning :Israel, If the number of the sons of Israel be
as the sand of the sea, the remnant shall be saved: 28 for the Lord will
execute his word upon the earth, finishing and cutting it short. 29 And, as
Isaiah hath said before,
Except the Lord of Sabaoth had left us a seed,
We had become as Sodom, and had been made like unto Gomorrah.
30 What shall we say then? That the nations, who followed not after
righteousness, apprehended righteousness, even the righteousness which
is of faith: 31 but Israel, following after a law of righteousness, did not arrive
at that law. 32 Wherefore? Because they sought it not by faith, but as it
were by works. They stumbled at the stone of :stumbling; 33 even as it is
written,
Lo, I lay in Zion a stone of stumbling and a rock of offence:
And who believeth on him shall not be put to shame.

Chapter 10
1 Brethren, the desire of my :heart and :supplication unto :God is for
their salvation. 2 For I bear them witness that they have a zeal for God, but
not according to knowledge. 3 For being ignorant of the righteousness of
God, and seeking to establish their own, they did not submit to the
righteousness of :God. 4 For Christ is the end of law unto righteousness to
every one that believeth. 5 For Moses writeth that the man that doeth the
righteousness which is of law shall live thereby. 6 But the righteousness
which is from faith saith thus, Say not in thy :heart, Who shall ascend into
the heaven? (that is, to bring Christ down:) 7 or, Who shall descend into the
abyss? (that is, to bring Christ up from the dead.) 8 But what saith it? The
word is night thee, in thy :mouth, and in thy :heart: that is, the word of the
faith, which we preach: 9 because if thou shalt confess the word with
thy :mouth that Jesus is Lord, and shalt believe in thy :heart that :God raised
him from the dead, thou shalt be saved: 10 for with the heart one believeth
unto righteousness; and with the mouth one confesseth unto salvation.
11 For the scripture saith, Whoever believeth on him shall not be put to
shame. 12 For there is no distinction between Jew and Greek: for he is the
same Lord of all, rich unto all that call upon him: 13 for, Whoever shall call
upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. 14 How then shall they call on
him in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe whom they
have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher? 15 and how
shall they preach, except they be sent? even as it is written, How beautiful
the feet of them that bring a gospel of good things! 16 But they did not
all hearken to the gospel. For Isaiah saith, Lord, who hath believed
our :report? 17 The faith therefore is by hearing, and :hearing by Christ’s
word. 18 But I say, Did they not hear? Yea, verily,
Their :sound went out into all the earth,
And their :words unto the ends of the inhabited earth.
19 But I say, Did Israel not know? First Moses saith,
I will provoke you to jealousy with what is no nation,
With a nation void of understanding will I enrage you.
20 And Isaiah is very bold, and saith,
I was found of them that sought me not;
I became manifest to them that asked not of me.
21 But as to :Israel he saith, All the day long did I spread out my :hands unto
a disobedient and gainsaying people.

Chapter 11
1 I say then, Did :God cast off his :people? Be it not so. For I also am
an Israelite, of Abraham’s seed, of Benjamin’s tribe. 2 :God did not cast off
his :people which he foreknew. Or know ye not what the scripture saith in
Elijah? how he pleadeth with :God against :Israel: 3 Lord, they have killed
thy :prophets, they have digged down thine :altars; and I am left alone, and
they seek my :life. 4 But what saith the answer to him? I have left for myself
seven thousand men, who have not bowed the knee to :Baal. 5 Even so
therefore at the present season also there is a remnant according to
election of grace. 6 But if by grace, it is no more of works: otherwise :grace
is no more grace. 7 What then? What Israel seeketh for, that he obtained
not; but the election obtained it, and the rest were hardened: 8 according as
it is written, God gave them a spirit of stupor, eyes that they should not see,
and ears that they should not hear, unto this very :day. 9 And David saith,
Let their :table become a snare, and a trap,
And a stumbling block, and a recompense unto them:
10 Let their :eyes be darkened, that they see not,
And bow thou down their :back always.
11 I say then, Did they stumble that they might fall? Be it not so: but by
their :trespass is :salvation to the Gentiles, to provoke them to jealousy.
12 Now if their :trespass is riches of a world, and their :loss riches of nations,
how much more their :fulness?
13 But I speak to you, the nations. Inasmuch then as I am apostle of
nations, I glorify my :ministry; 14 if by any means I may provoke to jealousy
them that are my :flesh, and save some of them. 15 For if the casting away
of them is a reconciling of a world, what is their receiving but life from the
dead? 16 And if the firstfruit is holy, the lump is also; and if the root is holy,
the branches are also. 17 But if some of the branches were broken off,
and thou, being a wild olive, wast grafted in among them, and didst become
partaker with them of the root of the fatness of the olive tree; 18 glory not
over the branches: but if thou gloriest, not thou bearest the root, but the root
thee. 19 Thou wilt say therefore, Branches were broken off, that I be grafted
in. 20 Well; by their unbelief were they broken off, and thou standest by the
faith. Be not high-minded, but fear: 21 for if :God spared not the natural
branches, neither will he spare thee. 22 Behold then God’s goodness and
severity: toward them that fell, severity; but toward thee, God’s goodness, if
thou continue in :goodness: otherwise thou also shalt be cut off. 23 And
they also, if they continue not in their unbelief, shall be grafted in: for :God is
able to graft them in again. 24 For if thou wast cut out of what is by nature a
wild olive :tree, and wast grafted contrary to nature into a good olive tree;
how much rather shall these, which are the natural branches, be grafted into
their own olive tree? 25 For I would not, brethren, have you ignorant of
this :mystery, lest ye be wise in your own conceits, that a hardening in part
hath befallen :Israel, till what time the fulness of the nations be come in;
26 and so all Israel shall be saved: even as it is written,
The Deliverer shall come out of Zion;
He shall turn away ungodlinesses from Jacob:
27 And this is the covenant unto them from me,
When I shall take away their :sins.
28 As to the gospel, they are enemies for your sake: but as to the election,
they are beloved for the fathers’ sake. 29 For the gifts and the calling
of :God are not repented of. 30 Just as YE in the past were disobedient
to :God, but now have obtained mercy by the disobedience of these, 31 thus
have these also now been disobedient, that by the mercy shown to you they
also may now obtain mercy. 32 For :God hath shut up :all unto
disobedience, that he might have mercy upon :all. 33 O the depth of riches
and wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable his :judgments, and
untraceable his :ways!
34 For who hath known the Lord’s mind? or who hath been his
counsellor?
35 Or who hath first given to him, and it shall be recompensed him
again?
36 For of him, and through him, and unto him, are all the things. To him the
glory unto the ages. Amen.

Chapter 12
1 I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of :God, to
present your :bodies a living sacrifice, holy, well-pleasing to God, your
spiritual service. 2 And be not fashioned according to this :age: but be
transformed by the renewing of the mind, that ye may prove what is the
good and well-pleasing and perfect will of :God.
3 For I say through the grace :given me, to every man that is among
you, not to think more highly than he ought to think; but so to think as to
think soberly, as :God hath dealt to each a measure of faith. 4 For even as
we have many members in one body, but all the members have not the
same office: 5 so we, the many, are one body in Christ, and severally
members one of another. 6 And having gifts differing according to the
grace :given us, whether prophecy, prophesy according to the proportion
of :faith; 7 or ministry, attend to the ministry; or who teacheth, to the
teaching; 8 or who exhorteth, to the exhorting: who giveth, be it with
liberality; who ruleth, with diligence; who showeth mercy, with cheerfulness.
9 Let the love be without hypocrisy. Abhor what is evil; cleave to what is
good. 10 In brotherly :love tenderly affectioned one to another; in :honor
preferring one another; 11 in :diligence not slothful; fervent in the spirit;
serving the Lord; 12 rejoicing in :hope; patient in :tribulation; continuing
steadfastly in :prayer; 13 communicating to the needs of the saints;
pursuing :hospitality. 14 Bless the persecutors; bless, and curse not.
15 Rejoice with the rejoicing; weep with the weeping. 16 Be of the same
mind one toward another. Set not your mind on the high things, but
condescend to the lowly. Become not wise in your own eyes. 17 Render to
none evil for evil. Take thought for things honorable in sight of all men. 18 If
possible, as much as in you is, be at peace with all men. 19 Avenge not
yourselves, beloved, but give place to the wrath; for it is written, Vengeance
is mine; I will recompense, saith the Lord. 20 But if thine :enemy hunger,
feed him; if he thirst, give him drink: for doing thus thou shalt heap coals of
fire upon his :head. 21 Be not thou overcome of :evil, but overcome :evil
with :good.

Chapter 13
1 Let every soul be in subjection to the higher powers: for there is no
power but of God; and those that be are ordained of God. 2 So that who
resisteth the power, withstandeth the ordinance of :God: and who withstand
shall receive to themselves judgment. 3 For the rulers are not a terror to the
good work, but to the evil. And wouldest thou not fear the power? do the
good, and thou shalt have praise therefrom: 4 for he is God’s minister to
thee for the good. But if thou do :evil, be afraid; for he beareth not the sword
in vain: for he is God’s minister, avenger for wrath to him that doeth :evil.
5 Wherefore ye must needs submit, not only because of the wrath, but also
for :conscience. 6 For for this cause ye pay tribute also; for they are
ministers of God’s service, attending continually upon this very thing.
7 Render to all their dues: :tribute to whom :tribute is due; :custom to
whom :custom: :fear to whom :fear; :honor to whom :honor. 8 Owe no
one anything, save to love one another: for who loveth the other hath
fulfilled the law. 9 For :Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not kill,
Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not covet, and if there be any other
commandment, it is summed up in this :word, in the Thou shalt love
thy :neighbor as thyself. 10 :Love worketh no ill to the neighbor: :love
therefore is fulfillment of law. 11 And this, knowing the season, that
already it is the hour for you to awake out of sleep: for now is our :salvation
nearer than when we believed. 12 The night is far spent, and the day is at
hand: let us therefore cast off the works of :darkness, and let us put on the
armor of :light. 13 Let us walk becomingly, as in the day; not in revelling and
drunkenness, not in chamberings and wantonness, not in strife and
jealousy. 14 But put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision unto
the lusts of the flesh.

Chapter 14
1 But the one weak in the faith receive, not for decision of reasonings.
2 One hath indeed faith to eat all things: but the weak eateth herbs. 3 Let
not him that eateth set at nought him that eateth not; and let not him that
eateth not judge him that eateth: for :God hath received him. 4 Who art thou
that judgest another’s servant? to his :own lord he standeth or falleth. Yea,
he shall be made to stand; for the Lord hath power to make him stand. 5 For
one esteemeth one day above another day: another esteemeth every day
alike. Let each be fully assured in his :own mind. 6 Who regardeth the day,
regardeth to the Lord: and who eateth, eateth to the Lord, for he giveth :God
thanks; and who eateth not, to the Lord he eateth not, and giveth :God
thanks. 7 For none of us liveth to himself, and none dieth to himself. 8 For
whether we live, we live to the Lord; or whether we die, we die to the Lord:
whether we live therefore, or die, we are the Lord’s. 9 For to this end Christ
died and lived again, that he might be Lord of both dead and living. 10 But
why judgest THOU thy :brother? or again, why settest THOU at naught
thy :brother? for we shall all stand before the judgment-seat of :God. 11 For
it is written,
I live, saith the Lord, that to me every knee shall bow,
And every tongue shall confess to :God.
12 So then each of us shall give account of himself to :God. 13 Let us
therefore judge one another no more: but judge this rather, that no
stumbling-block be put in the brother’s way, or an occasion of falling. 14 I
know, and am persuaded in the Lord Jesus, that nothing is common of itself:
save that to him who accounteth anything common, to him it is common.
15 For if because of meat thy :brother is grieved, thou walkest no longer in
love. Destroy not with thy :meat him for whom Christ died. 16 Let not then
your :good be evil spoken of: 17 for the kingdom of :God is not eating and
drinking, but righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit. 18 For who
herein serveth Christ is well-pleasing to :God, and approved of :men. 19 So
then let us follow after things of :peace, and the things for building up one
another. 20 Overthrow not for meat’s sake the work of :God. All things
indeed are clean; but evil for the man who eateth with offence. 21 It is good
not to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor to do anything whereby thy :brother
stumbleth. 22 What :faith THOU hast have to thyself before :God. Blessed
he that judgeth not himself in what he approveth. 23 But who doubteth is
condemned if he eat, because he eateth not of faith; and whatever is not of
faith is sin.

Chapter 15
1 Now we the strong out to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to
please ourselves. 2 Let each of us please his :neighbor for what is good,
unto building up. 3 For the Christ also pleased not himself; but, as it is
written, The reproaches of those reproaching thee fell upon me. 4 For
whatever things were written afore were all written for our :learning, that
through :patience and through :comfort of the scriptures we might
have :hope. 5 Now the God of :patience and of :comfort grant you to be of
the same mind one with another according to Christ Jesus: 6 that with one
accord ye may with one mouth glorify the God and Father of our :Lord Jesus
Christ.
7 Wherefore receive one another, even as the Christ also received
us, to God’s glory. 8 For I say that Christ hath been made minister of
circumcision for God’s truth, that he confirm the promises given to the
fathers, 9 and that the nations might glorify :God for mercy; as it is written,
Therefore will I give praise to thee among nations,
And sing to thy :name.
10 And again he saith,
Rejoice, ye nations, with his :people.
11 And again,
Praise the Lord, all the nations;
And let all the peoples praise him the more.
12 And again, Isaiah saith,
There shall be the root of :Jessai,
And he that ariseth to rule over nations;
On him shall nations hope.
13 Now the God of :hope fill you with all joy and peace in :believing, that ye
may abound in :hope, in power of the Holy Spirit.
14 And I myself also am persuaded concerning you, my brethren,
that yourselves are full of goodness, filled with all :knowledge, able also to
admonish one another. 15 But I write the more boldly to you in a measure,
as reminding you again, because of the grace :given me of :God, 16 that I be
minister of Christ Jesus unto the nations, ministering the gospel of :God,
that the offering up of the nations become acceptable, being sanctified by
the Holy Spirit. 17 I have therefore the glorying in Christ Jesus in the things
pertaining unto :God. 18 For I dare not speak aught save the things which
Christ wrought through me, for obedience of the nations, by word or deed,
19 in power of signs and wonders, in power of the Holy Spirit; so that from
Jerusalem, and round about even unto Illyricum, I have fully preached the
gospel of the Christ; 20 yea, making it my aim so to preach the gospel, not
where Christ was named, that I build not upon another’s foundation; 21 but,
even as it is written,
They shall see, to whom no tidings of him came,
And they who have not heard shall understand.
22 Wherefore also I was hindered these many times from coming
unto you: 23 but now, having no more place in these :regions, and having
these many years a longing to come unto you, 24 whenever I go to :Spain
(for I hope to see you in my journey, and to be brought on my way thither by
you, if first in a measure I be satisfied with you)—25 but now, I say, I go to
Jerusalem, ministering to the saints. 26 For Macedonia and Achaia were
well-pleased to make a certain contribution for the poor among the saints :at
Jerusalem. 27 For they were well pleased; and their debtors they are. For if
the nations have been made partakers of their :spiritual things, they ought
also to minister to them in carnal. 28 When therefore I have accomplished
this, and sealed to them this :fruit, I will go on by you to Spain. 29 And I
know that, when I come unto you, I shall come in fulness of Christ’s blessing.
30 Now I beseech you, brethren, by our :Lord Jesus Christ, and by the love
of the Spirit, to strive together with me in :prayers to :God for me; 31 that I be
delivered from the disobedient in :Judæa, and my :ministration :for
Jerusalem become acceptable to the saints; 32 that I come unto you in joy
through God’s will, and together with you rest. 33 Now the God of :peace be
with you all. Amen.

Chapter 16
1 And I commend to you Phœbē our :sister, who is also servant of
the church :at Cenchreæ: 2 that ye receive her in the Lord, worthily of the
saints, and assist her in whatsoever matter she have need of you: for she
herself also hath been a helper of many, and of my self.
3 Salute Prisca and Aquila my :fellow-workers in Christ Jesus, 4 who
for my :life laid down their own :necks: whom not only I thank, but also all the
churches of the nations: 5 and salute the church :in their :house. Salute
Epænetus my :beloved, who is the first fruit of :Asia unto Christ. 6 Salute
Mary, who bestowed much labor on you. 7 Salute Andronicus and Junia,
my :kinsmen, and my fellow-prisoners, who are noted among the apostles,
who also have been in Christ before me. 8 Salute Ampliatus my :beloved in
the Lord. 9 Salute Urbanus our :fellow-worker in Christ, and Stachys
my :beloved. 10 Salute Apellēs the approved in Christ. Salute those of the
house of Aristobulus. 11 Salute Hērōdiōn my :kinsman. Salute them of the
house of Narcissus, that are in the Lord. 12 Salute Tryphæna and Tryphōsa,
who labor in the Lord. Salute Persis the beloved, who labored much in the
Lord. 13 Salute Rufus the chosen in the Lord, and his :mother and mine.
14 Salute Asyncritus, Phlegōn, Hermēs, Patrobas, Hermas, and the
brethren :with them. 15 Salute Philologus and Julia, Nēreus and his :sister,
and Olympas, and all the saints :with them. 16 Salute one another with a
holy kiss. All the churches of the Christ salute you.
17 Now I beseech you, brethren, mark those causing the divisions
and the stumblings, contrary to the teaching which ye learned: and turn
away from them. 18 For the such are not bondmen of our :Lord Christ, but of
their own :belly; and by their smooth and fair speech they deceive the hearts
of the innocent. 19 For your :obedience is come unto all. I rejoice therefore
over you: but I would have you wise unto what is good, and harmless unto
what is evil. 20 And the God of :peace shall bruise :Satan under your :feet
shortly.
The grace of our :Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
21 Timothy my :fellow-worker saluteth you; and Lucius and Jason
and Sōsipater, my :kinsmen. 22 I Tertius, who write the epistle, salute you in
the Lord. 23 Gaius my :host, and of the whole church, saluteth you. Erastus
the treasurer of the city saluteth you, and Quartus the brother.
25 Now to the one able to establish you according to my :gospel and
the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to revelation of the mystery kept
silent through the times of ages, 26 but now is manifested, and through the
prophetic scriptures, according to commandment of the eternal God, is
made known unto all the nations unto obedience of faith: 27 to the only wise
God, through Jesus Christ, to whom the glory unto the ages. Amen.

UNTO THE CORINTHIANS I

Chapter 1
1 PAUL, a called apostle of Jesus Christ through God’s will, and Sōsthenēs
the brother, 2 to the church of :God which is at Corinth, those sanctified in
Christ Jesus, called saints, with all that call in every place upon the name of
our :Lord Jesus Christ, theirs and ours: 3 Grace to you and peace from God
our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
4 I thank :God always concerning you, for the grace of :God :given
you in Christ Jesus; 5 that in everything ye were enriched in him, in all
utterance and all knowledge; 6 even as the testimony of the Christ was
confirmed in you: 7 so that ye are behind in no gift; awaiting the revelation of
our :Lord Jesus Christ; 8 who shall also confirm you unto the end
unreprovable in the day of our :Lord Jesus Christ. 9 Faithful the God,
through whom ye were called into the fellowship of his :Son Jesus Christ
our :Lord.
10 Now I beseech you, brethren, through the name of our :Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye all speak the same, and no divisions be among you; but that
ye be perfected together in the same mind and in the same judgment.
11 For it hath been shown me concerning you, my brethren, by them of
Chloe’s house that contentions are among you. 12 Now this I say, that each
of you saith, I indeed am of Paul; and I of Apollos; and I of Cephas, and I of
Christ. 13 Christ is divided: was Paul crucified for you? or were ye baptized
into the name of Paul? 14 I give thanks that I baptized none of you, save
Crispus and Gaius; 15 lest any one say that ye were baptized into my :name.
16 And I baptized also the house of Stephanas: for the rest, I know not
whether I baptized any other. 17 For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to
preach the gospel: not in wisdom of words, lest the cross of the Christ be
made void.
18 For the word :of the cross is to the perishing foolishness; but to us
who are being saved it is God’s power. 19 For it is written,
I will destroy the wisdom of the wise,
And annul the discernment of the discerning.
20 Where is the wise? where the scribe? where the disputer of this :age?
hath not :God made foolish the wisdom of the world? 21 For since in the
wisdom of :God the world through :wisdom knew not :God, it was :God’s
good pleasure through the foolishness of the preachment to save them that
believe. 22 Since both Jews ask signs, and Greeks seek wisdom: 23 but WE
preach Christ crucified, a stumbling-block to Jews indeed, but to the nations
foolishness; 24 but to the called themselves, both Jews and Greeks, Christ
God’s power and God’s wisdom. 25 Because the foolishness of :God is
wiser than :men; and the weakness of :God is stronger than :men.
26 For look at your :calling, brethren, that not many wise after the flesh, not
many mighty, not many noble are chosen; 27 but :God chose the foolish
things of the world, that he put to shame the wise; and :God chose the weak
things of the world, that he put to shame the strong; 28 and the ignoble
things of the world, and the despised, did :God choose, and the things that
are not, that he bring to nought those that are: 29 that no flesh should glory
before :God. 30 But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who became to us both
wisdom from God, and righteousness and sanctification and redemption:
31 that, according as it is written, Who glorieth in the Lord let him glory.

Chapter 2
1 And I, brethren, when I came unto you, came not with excellency of
word or wisdom, proclaiming to you the mystery of :God. 2 For I decided to
know nothing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified. 3 And I was
with you in weakness, and in fear, and in much trembling. 4 And my :words
and my :preachment were not in persuasive words of wisdom, but in
demonstration of Spirit and power: 5 that your :faith be not in men’s wisdom,
but in God’s power. 6 We speak wisdom, however, among the fullgrown:
yet a wisdom not of this :age, nor of the rulers of this :age, who are coming
to nought: 7 but we speak God’s wisdom in mystery, the hidden wisdom
which God foreordained before the ages unto our glory: 8 which none of the
rulers of this :age hath known: for had they known it, they would not have
crucified the Lord of :glory: 9 but as it is written,
Things which eye saw not, and ear heard not,
And entered not into heart of man,
Whatsoever things :God prepared for them that love him.
10 For to us :God revealed through the Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth all
things, yea, the depths of :God. 11 For who among men knoweth the things
of the man, save the spirit of the man :in him? even so the things of :God
none knoweth, save the Spirit of :God. 12 But WE received, not the spirit of
the world, but the spirit which is from :God; that we might know the
things :freely given to us of :God. 13 Which things also we speak, not in
words taught of man’s wisdom, but in Spirit-taught words; interpreting
spiritual things to spiritual men. 14 Now man natural receiveth not the things
of the Spirit of :God: for they are foolishness to him; and know he cannot,
because they are spiritually judged. 15 But the spiritual man judgeth indeed
all things, but himself is judged of none. 16 For who hath known the Lord’s
mind, that he should instruct him? But we have Christ’s mind.

Chapter 3
1 And I, brethren, could not speak to you as to spiritual, but as to
carnal, as to babes in Christ. 2 I fed you milk, not meat; for ye were not yet
able to bear it.
Nay, even now are ye yet unable; 3 for ye are yet carnal: for whereas
jealousy is among you and strife, are ye not carnal, and walk ye not after
man’s manner? 4 For when one saith, I am of Paul; and another, I, of
Apollos; are ye not men? 5 What then is Apollos? and what is Paul?
Ministers through whom ye believed, and as the Lord gave to each. 6 I
planted, Apollos watered; but :God gave increase. 7 So then neither is who
planteth aught nor who watereth; but God that giveth increase. 8 Now who
planteth and who watereth are one: but each shall receive his own :reward
according to his own :toil. 9 For we are God’s fellow-workers: ye are God’s
husbandry, God’s building. 10 According to the grace of :God :given me,
as a wise masterbuilder I laid a foundation; and another buildeth thereon.
But let each look how he buildeth thereon. 11 For other foundation can no
one lay than what is laid, who is Jesus Christ. 12 But if any buildeth on the
foundation gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble; 13 the work of
each shall be made manifest: for the day shall declare it, because it is being
revealed in fire; and the fire itself shall prove the work of each of what sort it
is. 14 If the work of any shall abide which he built thereon, he shall receive
reward. 15 If the work of any shall be burned, he shall suffer loss: but
himself shall be saved; yet so as through fire. 16 Know ye not that ye
are God’s sanctuary, and the Spirit of :God dwelleth in you? 17 If any
corrupteth the sanctuary of :God, him shall :God corrupt; for the sanctuary
of God is holy, which ye are.
18 Let no one deceive himself. If any thinketh he is wise among you
in this :age, let him become a fool, that he become wise. 19 For the wisdom
of this :world is foolishness with :God. For it is written, Who taketh the wise
in their :craftiness: 20 and again, The Lord knoweth the reasonings of the
wise, that they are vain. 21 Wherefore let no one glory in men. For all things
are yours; 22 whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or world, or life, or death,
or things present, or coming; all are yours; 23 and ye are Christ’s; and Christ
is God’s.

Chapter 4
1 Let a man so account of us, as of ministers of Christ, and stewards
of God’s mysteries. 2 Here, moreover, it is required in the stewards, that
one be found faithful. 3 But with me it is a very small thing that I should be
judged of you, or of man’s day: yea, I judge not mine own self. 4 For I know
nothing against myself; yet am I not hereby justified: but who judgeth me is
the Lord. 5 Wherefore judge nothing before the season, until the Lord come,
who will both light up the hidden things of the darkness, and manifest the
counsels of the hearts; and then shall each have the praise from :God.
6 Now these, brethren, I have in a figure transferred to myself and Apollos
for your sakes; that in us ye might learn the Not to go beyond the things
written; that ye be not puffed up for the one against the other. 7 For who
maketh thee to differ? and what hast thou that thou didst not receive? but if
thou didst receive, why gloriest thou as if thou hadst not received?
8 Already are ye filled? already ye are become rich? have ye come to reign
without us? yea and I would indeed ye did reign, that we also might reign
with you. 9 For, I think, :God hath set forth us the apostles last, as doomed
to death: for we are become a spectacle unto the world and to angels and
men. 10 We are fools for Christ, but ye are wise in Christ; we are weak, but
ye strong; ye have glory, but we dishonor. 11 Unto the present hour we both
hunger, and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain
dwelling-place: 12 and we toil, working with our :own hands: being reviled,
we bless; being persecuted, we endure; 13 being defamed, we beseech: we
are become as filth of the world, offscouring of all things, even until now.
14 I write not these things to shame you, but to admonish you as my beloved
children. 15 For though ye may have ten thousand tutors in Christ, yet not
many fathers; for in Christ Jesus I begat you through the gospel. 16 I
beseech you therefore, become imitators of me. 17 For this cause have I
sent you Timothy, who is my beloved child and faithful in the Lord, who shall
remind you of my :ways which are in Christ Jesus, even as I teach
everywhere in every church.
18 Now some are puffed up, as though I were not coming to you.
19 But I will come unto you speedily, if the Lord will; and I will know, not the
word of those puffed up, but the power. 20 For the kingdom of :God is not in
word, but in power. 21 What will ye? shall I come unto you with a rod, or in
love and a spirit of gentleness?

Chapter 5
1 Fornication is actually reported among you, and such fornication as
is not even among the nations, that one hath his :father’s wife. 2 And ye are
puffed up, and did not rather mourn, that who had done this deed be taken
away from among you. 3 For I verily, being absent in :body but present
in :spirit, have already as if present judged him that hath so wrought this, 4 in
the name of our :Lord Jesus, ye being gathered, and my :spirit, with the
power of our :Lord Jesus, 5 to deliver the such to :Satan for destruction of
the flesh, that the spirit be saved in the day of the Lord. 6 Your glorying is
not good. Know ye not that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump?
7 Purge out the old leaven, that ye be a new lump, even as ye are
unleavened. For our :passover also hath been sacrificed, Christ:
8 wherefore let us keep festival, not with old leaven, neither with leaven of
malice and wickedness, but with unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.
9 I wrote you in the epistle not to mingle with fornicators; 10 not at all
meaning with the fornicators of this :world, or with the covetous and
extortioners, or with idolaters; since ye must then go out of the world: 11 but
now I write you not to mingle with, if any that is named a brother be a
fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a reviler, or a drunkard, or an
extortioner; with the such no, not to eat. 12 For what have I to do with
judging those without? Do not YE judge those within, 13 and those
without :God judgeth? Put away the wicked man from among yourselves.

Chapter 6
1 Dare any of you, having a matter against the other, go to law before
the unrighteous, and not before the saints? 2 Or know ye not that the saints
shall judge the world? and if the world is judged by you, are ye unworthy to
judge the smallest matters? 3 Know ye not that we shall judge angels? how
much more, things pertaining to this life? 4 If then ye have to judge things
pertaining to this life, do ye set them to judge who are of no account in the
church? 5 I say this to move you to shame. Thus is there not among you
one wise man who shall be able to decide between his :brothers, 6 but
brother goeth to law with brother, and that before unbelievers? 7 Nay,
already it is altogether a defect in you, that ye have lawsuits one with
another. Why not rather take wrong? why not rather be defrauded? 8 But
YE wrong and defraud, and that brethren. 9 Or know ye not that the
unrighteous shall not inherit God’s kingdom? Be not deceived: neither
fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of
themselves with men, 10 nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor
revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God. 11 And such
were some of you: but ye were washed, but ye were sanctified, but ye were
justified in the name of our :Lord Jesus Christ, and in the Spirit of our :God.
12 All things are lawful for me; but not all are expedient. All are lawful
for me; but I will not be brought under the power of any. 13 :Meats for the
belly, and the belly for :meats: but :God shall bring to nought both it and
them. But the body is not for fornication, but for the Lord; and the Lord for
the body: 14 and :God both raised the Lord, and will raise up us through
his :power. 15 Know ye not that your :bodies are members of Christ? shall I
then take away the members of the Christ, and make them members of a
harlot? Be it not so. 16 Or know ye not that who is joined to the harlot is one
body? for, The two, saith he, shall become one flesh. 17 But who is joined to
the Lord is one spirit. 18 Flee :fornication. Every sin that a man doeth is
without the body; but who commiteth fornication sinneth against his :own
body. 19 Or know ye not that your :body is a sanctuary of the Holy Spirit
who is in you, whom ye have from God? and ye are not your own; 20 for ye
were bought with a price: glorify :God therefore in your :body.

Chapter 7
1 Now concerning whereof ye wrote: It is good for a man not to touch
a woman. 2 But, because of fornications, let each have his own :wife, and
let each have her :own husband. 3 Let the husband render to the wife
her :due: and likewise also the wife to the husband. 4 The wife hath not
power over her own :body, but the husband: and likewise also the husband
hath not power over his own :body, but the wife. 5 Defraud not one the other,
except it be by consent for a season, that ye may give yourselves to :prayer,
and be together again, that :Satan tempt you not because of your
incontinency. 6 But this I say by way of concession, not of commandment.
7 Yet I would all men were even as I myself. But each hath his :own gift from
God, one this wise, and another thus wise.
8 But I say to the unmarried and the widows, It is good for them if they
abide even as I. 9 But if they have not continency, let them marry: for it is
better to marry than to burn. 10 But to the married I give charge, not I, but
the Lord, That a wife depart not from a husband 11 (but and if she depart, let
her remain unmarried, or be reconciled to the husband); and that a husband
leave not his wife. 12 But to the rest say I, not the Lord: If any brother hath
an unbelieving wife, and she is content to dwell with him, let him not leave
her. 13 And a woman that hath an unbelieving husband, and he is content
to dwell with her, let her not leave the husband. 14 For the
unbelieving :husband is sanctified in the wife, and the unbelieving :wife is
sanctified in the brother: else were your :children unclean; but now are they
holy. 15 Yet if the unbelieving departeth, let him depart: the brother or the
sister is not under bondage in :such cases: but God hath called you in
peace. 16 For how knowest thou, O wife, whether thou shalt save the
husband? or how knowest thou, O husband, whether thou shalt save the
wife? 17 Only, as the Lord hath distributed to each, as :God hath called
each, thus let him walk. And thus I ordain in all the churches. 18 Was any
called being circumcised? let him not become uncircumcised. Hath any
been called in uncircumcision? let him not be circumcised. 19 :Circumcision
is nothing, and :uncircumcision is nothing; but keeping of God’s
commandments. 20 Let each abide in the calling wherein he was called.
21 Wast thou called as a bondman? care not for it: nay, even if thou canst
become free, use it rather. 22 For who was called in the Lord being a
bondman, is the Lord’s freedman: likewise who was called free, is Christ’s
bondman. 23 Ye were bought with a price; become not bondmen of men.
24 Brethren, let each, wherein he was called, therein abide with God.
25 Now concerning the virgins I have no commandment of the Lord:
but I give judgment, as one that hath obtained mercy of the Lord, to be
faithful. 26 I think therefore that this is good because of the distress :upon
us: that it is good for a man to be as he is. 27 Art thou bound unto a wife?
seek not to be loosed. Art thou loosed from a wife? seek not a wife. 28 But
shouldest thou marry, thou hast not sinned; and if the virgin marry, she hath
not sinned. Yet such shall have tribulation in the flesh: and I am sparing you.
29 But this I say, brethren, the season is shortened, that henceforth both
those having wives may be as though not having; 30 and the weeping, as
though not weeping; and the rejoicing, as though not rejoicing; and the
buying, as though not possessing; 31 and those using the world, as not
using it to the full: for the fashion of this :world passeth away. 32 But I would
have you to be free from cares. The unmarried careth for the things of the
Lord, how he may please the Lord: 33 but the married careth for the things of
the world, how he may please the wife, 34 and is divided. Also the
unmarried :woman and the virgin careth for the things of the Lord, that she
be holy both in :body and in :spirit: but the married careth for the things of
the world, how she may please the husband. 35 And this I say for your
own :profit; not that I may cast a snare upon you, but for what :is seemly,
and assiduous toward the Lord without distraction. 36 But if any
thinketh he behaveth unseemly toward his :virgin, if she be past the flower
of age, and if need so requireth, let him do what he will; he sinneth not; let
them marry. 37 But who standeth steadfast in his :heart, having no
necessity, but hath power as touching his own :will, and hath decided this in
his own :heart, to keep his own :virgin, he shall do well. 38 So then both who
giveth his own :virgin in marriage doeth well; and who giveth not in marriage
shall do better. 39 A wife is bound for so long time as the husband liveth;
but if the husband be fallen asleep, she is free to be married to whom she
will; only in the Lord. 40 But she is more blessed if she abide as she is, after
my :judgment: and I think that I also have God’s Spirit.

Chapter 8
1 Now concerning the things sacrificed to idols: We know that we all
have knowledge. :Knowledge puffeth up, but :love buildeth up. 2 If any
thinketh he knoweth aught, he knoweth not yet as he ought to know; 3 but if
any loveth :God, the same is known by him. 4 Concerning therefore the
eating of things sacrificed to idols, we know that no idol is anything in the
world, and that there is no God but one. 5 For though there be so-called
gods, whether in heaven or on earth; just as gods are many, and lords many;
6 yet to us there is one God, the Father, of whom are :all things, and we unto
him; and one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom are all the things, and we
through him. 7 But not in all is the knowledge: but some, :being used until
now to the idol, eat as of a thing sacrificed to idols; and their :conscience
being weak is defiled. 8 But meat will not present us to :God: neither, if we
eat not, do we lack; nor, if we eat, do we abound. 9 But look ye lest by any
means this :power of yours become a stumbling-block to the weak. 10 For if
one see thee who hast knowledge sitting at meat in an idol’s temple, will not
his :conscience, if he is weak, be emboldened to eat things sacrificed to
idols? 11 For by thy :knowledge the weak perisheth, the brother for whom
Christ died. 12 And thus, sinning against the brethren, and smiting
their :conscience when weak, ye sin against Christ. 13 Wherefore, if meat
stumbles my :brother, I will eat no flesh unto the age, that I cause not
my :brother to stumble.

Chapter 9
1 Am I not free? am I not an apostle? have I not seen Jesus our :Lord?
are not ye my work in the Lord? 2 If to others I am not an apostle, yet at
least I am to you; for the seal of mine :apostleship are YE in the Lord.
3 My :defence to them that examine me is this. 4 Have we not authority to
eat and to drink? 5 Have we not authority to lead about a wife that is a sister,
even as the rest of the apostles, and the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas?
6 Or I only and Barnabas, have we not authority to forbear working? 7 Who
is ever a soldier at his own charges? who planteth a vineyard, and eateth
not the fruit thereof? or who feedeth a flock, and eateth not of the milk of the
flock? 8 Do I speak these things after man’s manner? or saith not the law
also the same? 9 For it is written in the law of Moses, Thou shalt not muzzle
an ox threshing. Or careth God for the oxen, 10 or saith he it altogether for
us? Yea, for us it was written: because who ploweth ought to plow in hope;
and who thresheth, to thresh in hope of partaking. 11 If we sowed for
you :spiritual things, is it a great matter if we shall reap your :carnal things?
12 If others partake of this :authority over you, do not we yet more? But we
did not use this :authority; but we bear all things, that we may cause no
hindrance to the gospel of the Christ. 13 Know ye not that who minister
about the holy things eat of the things of the holy place; they that wait upon
the altar have their portion with the altar? 14 Thus also the Lord ordained
those proclaiming the gospel to live of the gospel. 15 But I have used none
of these things: and I write not these that it be so done in my case; for it were
good for me rather to die, than—none shall make my :glorying void. 16 For
if I preach the gospel, I have nothing to glory of; for necessity is laid upon
me; for woe is me, if I should not preach the gospel. 17 For if I do this of my
will, I have reward: but if not of mine own will, I have a stewardship
entrusted to me. 18 What then is my :reward? That, when I preach the
gospel, I may give the gospel without charge, so as not to use to the full
my :authority in the gospel. 19 For though I was free from all, I brought
myself under bondage to all, that I might gain the more. 20 And to the Jews
I became as a Jew, that I might gain Jews; to those under law, as under law,
not being myself under law, that I might gain those under law; 21 to those
without law, as without law, not being without law to God, but under law to
Christ, that I might gain those without law. 22 To the weak I became weak,
that I might gain the weak: I am become all things to :all men, that I may by
all means save some. 23 And I do all things for the gospel, that I may
become joint partaker thereof. 24 Know ye not that who run in a
racecourse run all, but one receiveth the prize? So run ye that ye may
apprehend. 25 And every one that striveth in games exerciseth self-control
in all things. Now they do it therefore to receive a corruptible crown; but we
an incorruptible. 26 I accordingly so run, as not uncertainly; so fight I, as not
beating air:
27 but I bruise my :body, and bring it into bondage: lest by any means, after
that I have preached to others, I myself should be disapproved.

Chapter 10
1 For I would not, brethren, have you ignorant, that our :fathers were
all under the cloud, and all passed through the sea; 2 and were all baptized
unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea; 3 and did all eat the same spiritual
meat; 4 and did all drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of a spiritual
rock that followed them: now the rock was the Christ. 5 But with the greater
part of them :God was not well pleased: for they were overthrown in the
wilderness. 6 Now these things were our examples, to the intent we
should not lust after evils, as they also lusted. 7 Neither be idolaters as
some of them; even as it is written, The people sat down to eat and drink,
and rose to play. 8 Neither let us commit fornication, as some of them
committed, and fell in one day twenty-three thousand. 9 Neither let us make
severe trial of the Lord, as some of them made trial, and perished by the
serpents. 10 Neither murmur, as some of them murmured, and perished by
the destroyer. 11 Now these happened to them as a figure; and were written
for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the ages are come.
12 Wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth look lest he fall. 13 Only
human temptation hath overtaken you: but :God is faithful, who will not
suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but will with the temptation
make also the way out, that ye be able to endure it.
14 Wherefore, my beloved, flee from :idolatry. 15 I speak as to wise
men; judge what I say. 16 The cup of the blessing which we bless, is it not
communion of the blood of the Christ? The bread which we break, is it not
communion of the body of the Christ? 17 Because we the many are one loaf,
one body: for we all partake of the one bread. 18 Observe the Israel after
the flesh: have not they that eat the sacrifices communion with the altar?
19 What say I then? that aught sacrificed to idols is anything, or that an idol
is anything? 20 But I say, that the things which the nations sacrifice, they
sacrifice to demons, and not to God: and I would not that ye should have
communion with demons. 21 Ye cannot drink the Lord’s cup and a cup of
demons: ye cannot partake of the Lord’s table and of a table of demons.
22 Or do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger than he?
23 All things are lawful; but not all are expedient. All are lawful; but not all
build up. 24 Let no man seek his own, but the good of the other.
25 Everything :sold in shambles, eat, asking no question for :conscience’
sake; 26 for the earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof. 27 If one of the
unbelieving invite you to a feast, and ye wish to go; eat whatever is :set
before you, asking no question for :conscience’ sake. 28 But if any one say
to you, This hath been offered in sacrifice, eat not, for :his sake that showed
it, and for :conscience: 29 conscience, I say, however, not :thine own, but
the :other’s; for why is my :liberty judged by another conscience? 30 If I
partake with thankfulness, why am I evil spoken of for what I give thanks?
31 Whether therefore ye eat, or drink, or whatever ye do, do all to the glory
of God. 32 Give no occasion of stumbling, either to Jews, or to Greeks, or to
the church of :God: 33 even as I also please all in all things, not seeking
mine own :profit, but that of the many, that they be saved.

Chapter 11
1 Become imitators of me, even as I also am of Christ.
2 Now I praise you that ye remember me in all things, and hold fast
the traditions, even as I delivered to you. 3 But I would have you know, that
the head of every man is :Christ; and the head of woman is the man; and the
head of the Christ is :God. 4 Every man praying or prophesying, with head
covered, dishonoreth his :head. 5 But every woman praying or prophesying
with :head unveiled dishonoreth her :head; for it is one and the same as
if :shaven. 6 For if a woman is not veiled, let her also be shorn: but if it is a
shame for a woman to be shorn or shaven, let her be veiled. 7 For a man
ought not indeed to have the head veiled, he being God’s image and glory:
but the woman is the man’s glory. 8 For man is not of woman; but woman is
of man: 9 for neither was man created for the woman; but woman for the
man: 10 for this cause ought the woman to have a sign of authority on the
head, because of the angels. 11 Nevertheless, neither is woman without
man, nor man without woman in the Lord. 12 For just as the woman is of the
man, so is the man also by the woman; but :all things are of :God. 13 Judge
in yourselves: is it seemly that a woman pray to :God unveiled? 14 Doth not
even nature itself teach you, that, if a man have long hair, it is dishonor to
him? 15 But if a woman have long hair, it is glory to her: for the hair is given
her for a covering. 16 But if any seemeth to be contentious, WE have no
such custom, neither the churches of :God.
17 But in giving this charge, I praise not because ye come together
not for the better but for the worse. 18 For first, when ye come together in
church, I hear divisions exist among you; and I partly believe it. 19 For
factions must be also among you, that the approved be also manifest
among you. 20 When therefore ye come together in meeting, it is not
possible to eat the Lord’s supper: 21 for in :eating each taketh his :own
supper before; and one is hungry, and another is drunken. 22 What, have
ye not houses to eat and to drink in? or despise ye the church of :God, and
put them to shame that have nothing? What shall I say to you? shall I praise
you? In this I praise you not. 23 For I received of the Lord what also I
delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus in the night in which he was delivered
up took bread; 24 and when he gave thanks he brake it, and said, This is
my :body, which is for you: this do in :remembrance of me. 25 In like manner
also the cup, after :supper, saying, This :cup is the new covenant in
my :blood: this do, as oft as ye drink it, in :remembrance of me. 26 For as oft
as ye eat this :bread, and drink the cup, ye proclaim the death of the Lord till
he come. 27 So that whoever shall eat the bread or drink the cup of the Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and the blood of the Lord. 28 But let a
man prove himself, and thus let him eat of the bread, and drink of the cup.
29 For who eateth and drinketh, eateth and drinketh judgment to himself, if
he discern not the body. 30 For this cause many among you are weak and
sickly, and not a few sleep. 31 But if we discerned ourselves, we should not
be judged. 32 But when judged of the Lord, we are chastened, that we be
not condemned with the world. 33 So then, my brethren, when ye come
together to eat, wait one for another. 34 If any is hungry, let him eat at home;
that ye come not together unto judgment. And the rest will I set in order
whenever I come.

Chapter 12
1 Now concerning the spirituals, brethren, I would not have you
ignorant. 2 Ye know that as nations ye were led away unto those
dumb :idols, howsoever ye might be led. 3 Wherefore I make known to you,
that no one speaking by God’s Spirit saith, Jesus is anathema; and no one
can say, Jesus is Lord, but by the Holy Spirit. 4 Now there are
diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit. 5 And there are diversities of
ministrations, and the same Lord. 6 And there are diversities of workings,
but the same God, who worketh all the things in all. 7 But to each is given
the manifestation of the Spirit to :profit. 8 For to one is given through the
Spirit a word of wisdom; and to another a word of knowledge, according to
the same Spirit: 9 to another faith, in the same Spirit; and to another gifts of
healings, in the one Spirit; 10 and to another workings of powers; and to
another prophecy; and to another discernings of spirits: to another kinds of
tongues; and to another interpretation of tongues; 11 but all these worketh
the one and the same Spirit, dividing to each severally even as he willeth.
12 For even as the body is one, and hath many members, and all the
members of the body, being many, are one body; so also the Christ. 13 For
in one Spirit also were we all baptized into one body, whether Jews or
Greeks, whether bond or free; and were all made to drink of one Spirit.
14 For the body also is not one member, but many. 15 If the foot shall say,
Because I am not a hand, I am not of the body; it is not therefore not of the
body. 16 And if the ear shall say, Because I am not an eye, I am not of the
body; it is not therefore not of the body. 17 If the whole body were eye,
where were the hearing? If the whole were hearing, where the smelling?
18 But now hath :God set the members each of them in the body even as he
willed. 19 And if all were one member, where were the body? 20 But now
the members are many, but one body. 21 And the eye cannot say to the
hand, I have no need of thee: or again the head to the feet, I have no need
of you. 22 Nay, much rather, the members of the body which seem to be
more feeble are necessary: 23 and what parts of the body we think to be
less honorable, on these we bestow more abundant honor; and
our :uncomely parts have more abundant comeliness; 24 whereas our
comely parts have no need: but :God tempered the body together, giving
more abundant honor to that which is lacking; 25 that no schism be in the
body; but that the members should have the same care one for another.
26 And whether one member suffereth, all the members suffer with it; or a
member is glorified, all the members rejoice with it. 27 Now ye are Christ’s
body, and severally members thereof. 28 And :God hath set some in the
church, first apostles, second prophets, third teachers, then powers, then
gifts of healings, helps, governments, kinds of tongues. 29 Are all apostles?
are all prophets? are all teachers? are all power workers? 30 have all gifts
of healings? speak all in tongues? do all interpret? 31 But desire earnestly
the greater :gifts.
And I show you moreover an excellent way.

Chapter 13
1 If with the tongues of :men I speak, and of :angels, but have not love, I am
become sounding brass, or a clanging cymbal. 2 And if prophecy I have,
and all the mysteries I know and all knowledge; and if all faith I have, so as
to remove mountains, but have not love, I am nothing. 3 And if I dole out all
my :goods, and if I give my :body that I may glory, but have not love, it
profiteth me nothing. 4 :Love suffereth long, is kind; :love envieth not,
vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, 5 is not unseemly, seeketh not its :own,
is not provoked, taketh not account of :evil; 6 rejoiceth not
in :unrighteousness, but rejoiceth with the truth; 7 covereth all things,
believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things. 8 :Love never
faileth: but whether there be prophecies, they shall be done away; whether
tongues, they shall cease; whether knowledge, it shall be done away. 9 For
we know in part, and prophesy in part; 10 but when the perfect is come, what
is in part shall be done away. 11 When I was a child, I spake as a child,
thought as a child, reasoned as a child: when I became a man, I put away
the things of the child. 12 For now we see by a mirror darkly; but then face to
face: now I know in part; but then shall I know fully even as also I was fully
known. 13 But now abideth faith, hope, love, these :three; and the greater of
these is love.

Chapter 14
1 Follow after :love; yet desire earnestly the spirituals, but rather that
ye prophesy. 2 For who speaketh in a tongue speaketh not to men, but to
God; for no one heareth; but in spirit he speaketh mysteries. 3 But who
prophesieth speaketh unto men edification, and exhortation, and
consolation. 4 Who speaketh in a tongue buildeth up himself; but who
prophesieth buildeth up the church. 5 Now I would you all to speak in
tongues, but rather that ye prophesy: and greater he that prophesieth than
who speaketh in tongues, except he interpret, that the church receive
edification. 6 But now, brethren, if I come unto you speaking in tongues,
what shall I profit you, unless I speak to you either by revelation, or of
knowledge, or of prophecy, or of teaching? 7 Even the things without life,
giving a voice, whether pipe or harp, if they give no distinction in the sounds,
how shall it be known what is piped or harped? 8 For if also the trumpet give
an uncertain voice, who shall prepare himself for war? 9 So also ye, unless
ye utter by the tongue distinct speech, how shall it be known what is spoken?
for ye will be speaking into the air. 10 There are, it may be, so many kinds of
voices in the world, and nothing is voiceless. 11 If then I know not the force
of the voice, I shall be to him that speaketh a barbarian, and who speaketh
will be a barbarian in my mind. 12 So ye also, since ye are zealots for spirits,
seek that ye may abound unto the edification of the church. 13 Wherefore
let him that speaketh in a tongue pray that he interpret. 14 For if I pray in a
tongue, my :spirit prayeth, but my :understanding is unfruitful. 15 What is it
then? I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also: I
will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also. 16 Else if
thou bless in spirit, how shall who filleth the place of the unlearned say the
Amen at thy :giving of thanks, seeing he knoweth not what thou sayest?
17 For thou verily givest thanks well, but the other is not built up. 18 I
thank :God, I speak with a tongue more than you all: 19 but in church I would
rather speak five words with my :understanding that I might instruct others
also, than ten thousand words in a tongue. 20 Brethren, be not children
in your :minds, but in :malice be babes; in your :minds however be perfect.
21 In the law it is written, [that] By strange-tongued and by lips of strangers
will I speak to this :people; and not even thus will they hearken to me, saith
the Lord. 22 So that the tongues are for a sign, not to the believing, but to
the unbelieving: but prophecy is not to the unbelieving, but to the believing.
23 If therefore the whole church come together in meeting and all should
speak with tongues, and men ungifted or unbelieving come in, will they not
say that ye are mad? 24 But if all prophesy, and one unbelieving or ungifted
come in, he is reproved by all, judged by all; 25 the secrets of his :heart have
become manifest; and so he will fall on his face and worship :God, declaring
that :God is among you indeed. 26 What is it then, brethren? When ye
come together, each hath a psalm, hath a teaching, hath a revelation, hath
a tongue, hath an interpretation. Let all things be unto edifying. 27 If any
speaketh in a tongue, let it be by two, or at the most three, and in turn; and
let one interpret: 28 but if there be no interpreter, let him be silent in church;
and let him speak to himself, and to :God. 29 And let prophets speak by two
or three, and let the others discern. 30 But if a revelation be made to
another sitting by, let the first be silent. 31 For ye all can prophesy one by
one, that all may learn, and all may be exhorted; 32 (and the spirits of
prophets are subject to prophets; 33 for :God is not a God of confusion, but
of peace), as in all the churches of the saints.
34 Let the women be silent in the churches: for it is not permitted to
them to speak; but let them be in subjection, as also saith the law. 35 And if
they would learn anything, let them ask their own husbands at home; for it is
a shame for a woman to speak in church. 36 What, is it from you that the
word of :God went forth, or came it unto you alone? 37 If any thinketh
himself to be a prophet, or spiritual, let him take knowledge of what things I
write you, that it is the Lord’s commandment. 38 But if any is ignorant, let
him be ignorant. 39 So then, my brethren, desire earnestly to prophesy, and
forbid not to speak with tongues. 40 But let all things be done decently and
in order.

Chapter 15
1 Now I make known to you, brethren, the gospel which I preached to
you, which also ye received, in which also ye stand, 2 by which also ye are
being saved, if ye hold fast to the word which I preached to you, except ye
believed to no purpose. 3 For I delivered to you among first things what also
I received: that Christ died for our :sins according to the scriptures; 4 and
that he was buried; and that he hath been raised on the third :day according
to the scriptures; 5 and that he was seen of Cephas; then of the twelve;
6 thereupon was seen of above five hundred brethren at once, of whom the
more remain until now, but some are fallen asleep; 7 thereupon was seen of
James; then of all the apostles; 8 and last of all, as of the untimely birth, he
was seen of me also. 9 For I am the least of the apostles, that am not meet
to be called apostle, because I persecuted the church of :God. 10 But by
God’s grace I am what I am: and his :grace :unto me was not found void; but
I toiled more abundantly than they all: yet not I, but the grace of :God with
me. 11 Whether then I or they, so we preach, and so ye believed.
12 Now if Christ is preached that he hath been raised from the dead,
how say some among you that there is no resurrection of the dead? 13 But
if there is no resurrection of the dead, neither hath Christ been raised:
14 and if Christ hath not been raised, then is our preaching void, and our
faith also is void. 15 Yea, we are found false witnesses of :God; because we
witnessed for :God that he raised the Christ: whom he raised not, if so be
that the dead are not raised. 16 For if the dead are not raised, neither hath
Christ been raised: 17 and if Christ hath not been raised, your :faith is vain;
ye are yet in your :sins. 18 Then also those fallen asleep in Christ have
perished. 19 If we have in this :life only hoped in Christ, we are of all men
rather pitiable. 20 But now hath Christ been raised from the dead, first
fruit of those asleep. 21 For since by man is death, by man is also
resurrection of the dead. 22 For as in :Adam all die, so also in the Christ
shall all be made alive. 23 But each in his :own order: Christ a first fruit; then
they that are the Christ’s, at his :presence. 24 Then the end, when he shall
deliver up the kingdom to the God and Father; when he shall have
abolished all rule and all authority and power. 25 For he must reign, till he
put all his :enemies under his :feet. 26 The enemy to be abolished last
is :death. 27 For, He subjected all things under his :feet. But when he saith
that all the things are subjected, it is evident that he is excepted who did
subject :all things to him. 28 And when all the things have been subjected to
him, then also the Son shall himself be subjected to him that did subject all
the things to him, that :God be all in all. 29 Else what shall they do that
are baptized for the dead? If the dead are not raised at all, why then are
they baptized for them? 30 why are WE also in peril every hour? 31 I protest
by your glorying, brethren, which I have in Christ Jesus our :Lord, I die daily.
32 If :after man’s manner I fought beasts at Ephesus, what doth it profit me?
If the dead are not raised, let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die. 33 Be
not deceived: Evil companionships corrupt good morals. 34 Awake to
soberness righteously, and sin not; for some have no knowledge of God: I
speak to shame you.
35 But some one will say, How are the dead raised? and with what
sort of body do they come? 36 Foolish one, what THOU sowest is not made
alive except it die: 37 and what thou sowest, thou sowest not the body that
shall be, but bare grain, it may chance of wheat, or of some of the rest;
38 but :God giveth it a body even as he would, and to each of the seeds its
own body. 39 All flesh is not the same flesh, but one is of men, and another
flesh of beasts, and another flesh of birds, and another of fishes. 40 There
are also bodies heavenly, and bodies earthly: but the glory of the heavenly
is one, and the glory of the earthly is another. 41 One glory of sun, and
another glory of moon, and another glory of stars; for star differeth from star
in glory. 42 So also the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corruption;
raised in incorruption: 43 sown in dishonor; raised in glory: sown in
weakness; raised in power: 44 sown a natural body; raised a spiritual. If
there is a natural body, there is also a spiritual. 45 So also it is written, The
first man Adam became a living soul. The last Adam a lifegiving spirit.
46 Howbeit not the spiritual is first, but the natural; then the spiritual. 47 The
first man is of earth, of dust; the second man is of heaven. 48 As is the
earthy, such are also the earthy ones: and as is the heavenly, such are also
the heavenly. 49 And as we have borne the image of the dust, let us also
bear the image of the heavenly. 50 Now this I say, brethren, that flesh and
blood cannot inherit God’s kingdom; neither doth corruption inherit
incorruption. 51 Lo, I tell you a mystery: We shall not all sleep, but we shall
all be changed, 52 in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump:
for a trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and WE
shall be changed. 53 For this :corruptible must put on incorruption, and
this :mortal must put on immortality. 54 But when this :mortal shall have put
on :immortality, then shall come to pass the saying :written, :Death is
swallowed up unto victory. 55 O death, where is thy :victory? O death,
where thy :sting? 56 Now the sting of :death is :sin; and the power of :sin is
the law: 57 but thanks be to :God, who giveth us the victory through
our :Lord Jesus Christ. 58 Wherefore, my beloved brethren, be steadfast,
unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, knowing that
your :toil is not vain in the Lord.

Chapter 16
1 Now concerning the collection :for the saints, as I gave order to the
churches of :Galatia, so also do ye. 2 Upon the first day of the week let each
of you lay by him in store, as he may prosper, that when I come no
collections be then made. 3 And when I arrive whomsoever ye shall
approve with letters, them will I send to carry your :bounty to Jerusalem:
4 and if it be meet for me to go also, they shall go with me. 5 But I will
come unto you, when I shall have passed through Macedonia; for I pass
through Macedonia; 6 but it may be that I shall abide with you; or winter, that
ye may set me forward on my journey whithersoever I go. 7 For I do not
wish to see you now by the way; for I hope to tarry some time with you, if the
Lord permit. 8 But I will tarry at Ephesus until :Pentecost; 9 for a great door
and effectual is opened to me, and adversaries are many. 10 Now if
Timothy come, see that he be with you without fear; for he worketh the
Lord’s work, as I also: 11 let no one therefore despise him. But set him
forward on his journey in peace, that he come unto me: for I expect him with
the brethren. 12 But as touching Apollos the brother, I besought him
much to come unto you with the brethren: and it was not at all the will to
come now; but he will come when he shall have opportunity. 13 Watch,
stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong. 14 Let all ye do be in love.
15 Now I beseech you, brethren (ye know the house of Stephanas, that it is
a first fruit of Achaia, and they have set themselves to minister to the saints),
16 that ye also submit to :such, and to every one that helpeth in the work and
toileth. 17 And I rejoice at the presence of Stephanas and Fortunatus and
Achaicus: for what was lacking on your :part THEY supplied. 18 For they
refreshed my :spirit and :yours: acknowledge ye therefore :such.
19 The churches of :Asia salute you. Aquila and Prisca salute you
much in the Lord, with the church in their house. 20 All the brethren salute
you. Greet one another with a holy kiss. 21 The greeting of me Paul with
my :hand. 22 If any loveth not the Lord, let him be anathema. Maranatha.
23 The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with you. 24 My :love with you all in
Christ Jesus.

UNTO THE CORINTHIANS II

Chapter 1
1 PAUL, apostle of Christ Jesus through God’s will, and Timothy the brother,
to the church of :God which is in Corinth, with all the saints that are in the
whole of Achaia: 2 Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the
Lord Jesus Christ.
3 Blessed the God and Father of our :Lord Jesus Christ, the Father
of :mercies and God of all comfort; 4 who comforteth us in all our :affliction,
that we be able to comfort those in any :affliction, through the comfort
wherewith we ourselves are comforted of :God. 5 Because as the
sufferings of the Christ abound unto us, even so our :comfort also
aboundeth through the Christ. 6 But whether we are afflicted, it is for
your :comfort and salvation; whether we are comforted, it is for your comfort,
which worketh in endurance of the same sufferings which we also suffer:
7 and our :hope for you is steadfast; knowing that, as ye are partakers of the
sufferings, so also of the comfort. 8 For we would not have you ignorant,
brethren, concerning our :affliction which befell us in :Asia, that we were
weighed down exceedingly, beyond our power, insomuch that we despaired
even of life: 9 but ourselves have had the sentence of :death within
ourselves, that we should not be trusting in ourselves, but in :God who
raiseth the dead: 10 who delivered us out of so great a death, and will deliver:
on whom we have hoped that he will also still deliver us; 11 YE also helping
together on our behalf by the supplication; that, for the gift bestowed upon
us by means of many, thanks be given by many persons on our behalf.
12 For our :glorying is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in
holiness and sincerity of :God, and not in fleshly wisdom but in God’s grace,
we behaved in the world, and more abundantly toward you. 13 For we write
you no other things, than what ye read or even acknowledge, and I hope ye
will acknowledge unto the end: 14 even as also ye did acknowledge us in
part, that we are your glorying, just as ye also are ours, in the day of
our :Lord Jesus.
15 And in this :confidence I intended to come first unto you, that ye
might have a second joy; 16 and by you to pass into Macedonia, and again
from Macedonia to come unto you, and of you to be set forward
unto :Judæa. 17 When I therefore intended thus, did I show :fickleness? or
the things I purpose, do I purpose according to the flesh, that with me the
yea should be yea and the nay nay? 18 But :God is faithful that
our :word :unto you is not yea and nay. 19 For the Son of :God, Jesus Christ,
who was preached among you through us, through me and Silvanus and
Timothy, was not yea and nay, but in him is yea. 20 For however many the
promises of God, in him is the yea: wherefore also through him is the Amen,
unto glory to :God through us. 21 Now who establisheth us with you unto
Christ, and anointed us, is God; 22 who also sealed us, and gave the
earnest of the Spirit in our :hearts. 23 But I call God for a witness upon
my :soul, that to spare you I came not yet unto Corinth. 24 Not that we lord
it over your :faith, but are fellow-laborers of your :joy: for by :faith ye stand
fast.

Chapter 2
1 For I determined this for myself: not to come again to you with sorrow.
2 For if I make you sorry, who then is he that maketh me glad but he that is
made sorry by me? 3 And I wrote this very thing, lest, when I came, I should
have sorrow from them of whom I ought to rejoice; trusting you all, that
my :joy is that of you all. 4 For out of much tribulation and anguish of heart I
wrote you with many tears; not that ye be made sorry, but that ye might
know the love which I have more abundantly unto you. 5 But if any hath
caused sorrow, he hath caused sorrow, not to me, but in part (that I press
not too heavily) to you all. 6 Sufficient to the such is the punishment which
was by the many; 7 so that contrariwise ye should rather forgive and comfort,
lest the such be swallowed up with overmuch :sorrow. 8 Wherefore I
beseech you to confirm love toward him. 9 For to this end also did I write,
that I might know the proof of you, whether ye are obedient in all things.
10 But to whom ye forgive anything, I also: for what I also have forgiven, if I
have forgiven anything, it is for your sakes in Christ’s person; 11 that no
advantage be gained over us by :Satan: for we are not ignorant of
his :devices.
12 Now when I came to :Troas for the gospel of the Christ, and a door
was opened to me in the Lord, 13 I had no relief for my :spirit in not finding
Titus my :brother: but taking leave of them, I went forth into Macedonia.
14 But thanks to :God, who always leadeth us in triumph in the Christ, and
maketh manifest through us the savor of his :knowledge in every place.
15 For we are a sweet savor of Christ to God, in those being saved, and in
those perishing; 16 to the one a savor from death unto death; to the other a
savor from life unto life. And who is sufficient for these? 17 For we are not
as the many, bartering the word of :God: but as of sincerity, but as of God in
God’s sight speak we in Christ.

Chapter 3
1 Are we beginning again to commend ourselves? or need we, as do
some, epistles of commendation unto you or from you? 2 YE are our :epistle,
written in our :hearts, known and read of all men; 3 being made manifest
that ye are Christ’s Epistle, ministered by us, and written not with ink, but
with the living God’s Spirit; not in tables of stone, but on tables of hearts of
flesh.
4 And such confidence have we through the Christ toward God: 5 not
that we are sufficient of ourselves, to account anything as from ourselves;
but our :sufficiency is from :God; 6 who also made us sufficient as ministers
of a new covenant; not of the letter, but of the spirit: for the letter killeth, but
the spirit giveth life. 7 But if the ministration of :death in letters engraven
on stones came to be in glory, so that the children of Israel could not look
steadfastly upon the face of Moses for the glory of his :face; which was
being done away: 8 how shall not rather the ministration of the spirit be with
glory? 9 For if the ministration of :condemnation is glory, much rather doth
the ministration of :righteousness exceed in glory. 10 For verily what hath
been made glorious hath not been made glorious in this :part, by reason of
the surpassing glory. 11 For if what was being done away was through glory,
much more what remaineth is in glory. 12 Having therefore such hope,
we use great boldness, 13 and not just as Moses put a veil upon his :face,
that the children of Israel should not look steadfastly on the end of what was
being done away: 14 but their thoughts were hardened: for until this
very :day at the reading of the old covenant the same veil remaineth, it not
being revealed to them that it is done away in Christ. 15 But unto this day,
whenever Moses is read, a veil lieth upon their :heart. 16 But whenever one
shall turn to the Lord, the veil is taken away. 17 Now the Lord is the Spirit:
and where the Spirit of the Lord is, is liberty. 18 But we all, with unveiled
face beholding as in a mirror the glory of the Lord, are transformed into the
same image from glory to glory, even as from the Lord the Spirit.

Chapter 4
1 Having therefore this :ministry, even as we obtained mercy, we
faint not: 2 but we have renounced the hidden things of the shame, not
walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of :God deceitfully; but by the
manifestation of the truth commending ourselves to every conscience of
men in God’s sight. 3 And if our :gospel is veiled, it is veiled in the perishing:
4 in whom the god of this :age, hath blinded the thoughts of the unbelieving,
that the enlightenment of the gospel of the glory of the Christ, who is God’s
image, should not dawn upon them. 5 For we preach not ourselves, but
Christ Jesus as Lord, and ourselves as your bondmen for Jesus’ sake.
6 Because it is :God that said, Light shall shine out of darkness, who shined
in our :hearts, unto enlightenment of the knowledge of the glory of :God in
Christ’s face.
7 But we have this :treasure in earthen vessels, that the exceeding
greatness of the power be of :God, and not from us; 8 we are pressed on
every side, yet not straitened; perplexed, yet not over-perplexed; 9 pursued,
yet not left behind; smitten down, yet not destroyed; 10 always bearing
about in the body the dying of :Jesus, that the life also of :Jesus be
manifested in our :body. 11 For we who live are always delivered unto death
for Jesus, that the life also of :Jesus be manifested in our mortal :flesh.
12 So that :death worketh in us, but :life in you. 13 But having the same spirit
of :faith, according to what is written, I believed, wherefore I spake; we also
believe, wherefore also we speak; 14 knowing that who raised up the Lord
Jesus shall raise up us also with Jesus, and shall present us with you.
15 For all the things are for you, that the grace, being multiplied through the
many, may cause the thanksgiving to abound unto the glory of :God.
16 Wherefore we faint not; but though our outward :man is decaying, yet
our :inward man is renewed day by day. 17 For the light
momentary :affliction worketh for us more and more exceedingly an eternal
weight of glory; 18 while WE look not at what are seen, but at what are not
seen: for what are seen are temporal; but what are not seen are eternal.

Chapter 5
1 For we know that if the earthly house of our :tabernacle be dissolved, we
have a building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal, in the
heavens. 2 For verily in this we groan, longing to be clothed upon with
our :habitation which is from heaven: 3 if so be that clothed we shall not be
found naked. 4 For verily we that are in the tabernacle groan, being
burdened; not for that we would be unclothed, but that we would be clothed
upon, that the mortal be swallowed up of the life. 5 Now who wrought us for
this very thing is God, who gave us the earnest of the Spirit. 6 Always
therefore of good courage, and knowing that, whilst we are at home in the
body, we are away from home from the Lord 7 (for we walk through faith, not
through sight)—8 we are of good courage, and are pleased rather to be
away from home from the body, and to be at home with the Lord.
9 Wherefore also we are ambitious, whether at home or away from home, to
be well-pleasing to him. 10 For we must all be manifested before the
judgment-seat of the Christ; that each receive the things done through the
body, according to what he hath done, whether good or bad.
11 Knowing therefore the fear of the Lord, we persuade men, but we
are manifested to God; and I hope that we are manifested also in
your :consciences. 12 We are not again commending ourselves to you, but
as giving you occasion of glorying on our behalf, that ye may have toward
those glorying in face, and not in heart. 13 For whether we were beside
ourselves, it is to God; whether we are of sober mind, it is to you. 14 For the
love of the Christ constraineth us; having thus judged, that one died for all,
therefore :all died; 15 and he died for all, that they that live should no longer
live to themselves, but to him who for their sakes died and rose again.
16 So that we from :now on know no one after the flesh: even
though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now we know him so no
more. 17 So that if any is in Christ, he is a new creature: the old are passed
away; lo, they are become new. 18 But all the things are of :God, who
reconciled us to himself through Christ, and gave to us the ministry
of :reconciliation; 19 to wit, that God was in Christ reconciling the world to
himself, not reckoning to them their :trespasses, and having committed to
us the word of :reconciliation. 20 We are ambassadors therefore on
behalf of Christ, as though :God were entreating by us: we beseech on
behalf of Christ, be reconciled to :God. 21 Him who knew no sin he made
sin on our behalf; that WE might become righteousness of God in him.

Chapter 6
1 And working together with him we entreat also that ye receive not
the grace of :God in vain, 2 for he saith,
At an acceptable season I hearkened to thee,
And in a day of salvation I succored thee:
lo, now is an acceptable season; lo, now is a day of salvation: 3 giving no
occasion of stumbling in anything, that the ministration be not blamed; 4 but
in everything commending ourselves, as ministers of God, in much patience,
in tribulations, in needs, in distresses, 5 in stripes, in imprisonments, in
tumults, in toils, in watchings, in fastings; 6 in pureness, in knowledge, in
longsuffering, in kindness, in the Holy Spirit, in love unfeigned, 7 in the word
of truth, in God’s power; through the armor of :righteousness on the right
and left, 8 through glory and dishonor, through evil report and good report;
as deceivers, and true: 9 as unknown, and well known; as dying, and lo, we
live; as chastened, and not killed; 10 as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as
poor, yet making many rich; as having naught and possessing all.
11 Our mouth is open unto you, Corinthians, our :heart enlarged.
12 Ye are not straitened in us, but ye are straitened in your :affections.
13 Now for a recompense in :kind I speak as to children, be YE also enlarged.
14 Be not unequally yoked with unbelievers: for what fellowship have
righteousness and iniquity? or what communion hath light with darkness?
15 And what concord hath Christ with Beliar? or what portion hath believer
with unbeliever? 16 And what agreement hath God’s sanctuary with idols?
for we are the living God’s sanctuary; even as :God said [that]
I will dwell in them, and walk;
And be their :God, and they shall be my people.
17 Wherefore come out from their midst,
And be separate, saith the Lord,
And touch no unclean thing;
And I will receive you,
18 And will be Father to you,
And ye shall be to me sons and daughters,
Saith the Lord Almighty.

Chapter 7
1 Having therefore these :promises, beloved, let us cleanse
ourselves from all defilement of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in fear of
God. 2 Make room for us: we wronged none, corrupted none, took
advantage of none. 3 I say it not to condemn: for I have said before, that ye
are in our :hearts :to die together and live together. 4 Great my boldness
toward you, great my glorying on your behalf. Am filled with :comfort,
overflowed with :joy in all our :tribulation. 5 For even when we were
come into Macedonia our :flesh had no relief, but we were afflicted on every
side; fightings without, fears within. 6 But the God who comforteth the lowly
comforted us with the presence of Titus; 7 and not with his :presence only,
but also with the comfort wherewith he was comforted in you, telling us
your :longing, your :mourning, your :zeal for me; so that I rejoiced yet more.
8 Because though I made you sorry with the letter, I do not regret: though I
did regret (I see that that :letter made you sorry, though but for an hour), 9 I
now rejoice, not that ye were made sorry, but that ye were made sorry unto
repentance; for ye were made sorry according to God, that ye might suffer
loss from us in nothing. 10 For the sorrow, according to God, worketh a
regretless repentance unto salvation: but the sorrow of the world worketh
death. 11 For lo, this self-same thing, that ye were made sorry according to
God, what diligence it wrought in you, yea clearing, yea indignation, yea
fear, yea longing, yea zeal, yea avenging! In everything ye approved
yourselves to be pure in the matter. 12 So although I wrote you, not for his
sake that has wronged, yet not for his sake that was wronged, but for the
sake of your diligence for us being manifested unto you in God’s sight.
13 Therefore we have been comforted. Now in our :comfort we joyed
the more exceedingly for the joy of Titus, because his :spirit hath been
refreshed by you all. 14 For if in anything I have gloried to him on your
behalf, I was not shamed; but as we spake all things to you in truth, so our
glorying also before Titus came to be truth. 15 And his :affection is more
abundantly toward you, while he remembereth the obedience of you all,
how with fear and trembling ye received him. 16 I rejoice that in everything I
am of good cheer concerning you.

Chapter 8
1 Moreover, brethren, we make known to you the grace
of :God :given in the churches of :Macedonia; 2 how that in much proof of
tribulation the abundance of their :joy and their deep :poverty abounded
unto the riches even of their :liberality. 3 For according to their power, I bear
witness, yea and beyond power, they gave of their own accord,
4 beseeching us with much entreaty in regard of the grace and the
fellowship in the ministry to the saints: 5 and, not as we had hoped, but first
they gave their own selves to the Lord, and to us through God’s will.
6 Insomuch that we exhorted Titus, that as he had begun afore, so he would
also complete unto you this grace also. 7 But just as ye abound in
everything, in faith, and word and knowledge, and all diligence and our :love
in you, see that ye abound in this :grace also. 8 I speak not by
commandment, but as proving through the earnestness of others the
sincerity also of your :love. 9 For ye know the grace of our :Lord Jesus
Christ, that, being rich, for you he became poor, that ye by his :poverty
might become rich. 10 And herein I give my judgment: for this is expedient
for you, who began afore a year ago, not only :to do, but also :to will. 11 But
now complete the doing also; so that as the readiness :to will, so be the
completion also out of what you have. 12 For if the readiness is there, it is
acceptable according as one hath, not according as he hath not. 13 For I
speak not that others have ease and ye tribulation; 14 but by equality:
your :abundance being at this present :season for their :want, that
their :abundance also be unto your :want; that there be equality: 15 as it is
written, He with much had nothing over; and he with the little had no lack.
16 But thanks be to :God, who putteth the same diligence for you into the
heart of Titus. 17 For he accepted indeed the exhortation; but being himself
more diligent, he went forth unto you of his own accord. 18 And we have
sent along with him the brother whose :praise in the gospel is through all the
churches; 19 and not only so, but who was also appointed by the churches
as our fellow-traveller in this :grace, which is ministered by us unto the glory
of the Lord, and showing our readiness: 20 avoiding this, that any man
should blame us in this :bounty :ministered by us: 21 for we take thought for
things honorable, not only in the Lord’s sight, but also in men’s sight. 22 And
we have sent with them our :brother, whom we have oft proved to be diligent
in many things, but now more diligent by the great confidence unto you.
23 Whether any inquire about Titus, he is my partner and fellow worker
toward you; or our :brethren, they are messengers of the churches, Christ’s
glory. 24 Show therefore unto them in face of the churches the proof of
your :love, and of our glorying on your behalf.

Chapter 9
1 For as touching the ministry :unto the saints it is superfluous for
me :to write you: 2 for I know your :readiness, of which I glory on your behalf
to the Macedonians, that Achaia hath been prepared for a year; and
your :zeal hath stirred up their more part. 3 But I have sent the brethren,
that our :glorying :on your behalf be not made void in this :respect; that,
even as I said, ye may be prepared: 4 lest somehow, if Macedonians come
with me and find you unprepared, we (that we say not, ye) be put to shame
in this :confidence. 5 I thought it necessary therefore to exhort the brethren,
that they would go before unto you, and make up beforehand your
aforepromised :bounty, that the same might thus be ready as a matter of
bounty, and not of extortion. 6 But this I say, Who soweth sparingly
shall reap also sparingly; and who soweth bountifully shall reap also
bountifully. 7 Let each do according as he hath purposed in his :heart: not
grudgingly, or of necessity: for :God loveth a cheerful giver. 8 And :God is
able to make all grace abound unto you; that ye, having always all
sufficiency in everything, may abound unto every good work: 9 as it is
written,
He hath scattered abroad, he hath given to the poor;
His :righteousness abideth unto the age.
10 And he that supplieth seed to the sower and bread for food, shall supply
and multiply your :seed for sowing, and increase the fruits of
your :righteousness: 11 ye being enriched in everything unto all liberality,
which worketh through us thanksgiving to :God.—12 Because the
ministration of this :service is not only fully supplying the wants of the saints,
but is abounding also through many thanksgivings to :God—13 through the
proving of you by this :ministration, they glorifying :God for the obedience of
your :confession unto the gospel of the Christ, and for the liberality of the
contribution unto them and unto all; 14 while they themselves also, with
supplication for you, long after you by reason of the exceeding grace
of :God upon you. 15 Thanks to :God for his unspeakable :gift.

Chapter 10
1 Now I Paul myself entreat you by the meekness and gentleness of
the Christ, who in person am lowly among you, but absent show courage
toward you: 2 yea, I beseech you, that I may not when present show
courage with the confidence wherewith I count to be bold against some,
who count of us as if we walked according to the flesh. 3 For though we
walk in the flesh, we do not war according to the flesh 4 (for the weapons of
our :warfare are not of flesh, but mighty before :God unto casting down of
strongholds); 5 casting down reasonings, and every high thing that is
exalted against the knowledge of :God, and bringing every thought into
captivity to the obedience of the Christ; 6 and being in readiness to avenge
all disobedience, when your :obedience shall be made full. 7 Do ye look at
the things pertaining to appearance? If any trusteth in himself that he is
Christ’s, let him consider this again with himself, that, even as he is Christ’s,
so also we. 8 For though I should glory somewhat more abundantly
concerning our :authority (which the Lord gave for building up, and not for
casting you down), I shall not be shamed: 9 that I seem not as if I would
terrify you by the letters. 10 Because the letters, they say, are weighty and
strong; but the bodily :presence is weak, and his speech of no account.
11 Let such a one reckon this, that, what we are in word by letters when
absent, such are we also in deed when present. 12 For we are not bold to
judge among, or to judge ourselves with certain of them that commend
themselves: but themselves measuring themselves by themselves, and
judging themselves with themselves, are without understanding. 13 But WE
will not glory beyond :measure, but according to the measure of the
measuring-rod which God apportioned to us as a measure, to reach even
unto you.—14 For we stretch not ourselves overmuch, as though we
reached not unto you: for we came even as far as unto you in the gospel of
the Christ: 15 not glorying beyond :measure, that is, in other’s labors; but
having hope that, as your :faith groweth, we shall be magnified in you
according to our :measuring-rod unto abundance, 16 so as to preach the
gospel even unto the parts beyond you, and not to glory in another’s
measuring-rod in regard of the things ready. 17 But who glorieth in the Lord
let him glory. 18 For not that man is approved who commendeth himself but
he whom the Lord commendeth.

Chapter 11
1 Would that ye could bear with me in a little foolishness: but ye
indeed bear with me. 2 For I am zealous over you with a zeal of God; for I
espoused you to one husband, that I might present you a pure virgin to the
Christ. 3 But I fear, lest somehow, as the serpent beguiled Eve in
his :craftiness, your :thoughts should be corrupted from the simplicity and
the purity that is toward the Christ. 4 For if he who cometh preacheth
another Jesus, whom we did not preach, or ye receive a different spirit,
which ye did not receive, or a different gospel, which ye did not accept, ye
bear well with him. 5 For I reckon that I am behind the chief apostles in
nothing. 6 But though rude in :speech, yet am I not in :knowledge; nay, in
every way have we made this manifest unto you in all things. 7 Or did
I commit a sin in abasing myself that ye be exalted, because I preached to
you the gospel of :God for nought? 8 I robbed other churches, taking wage
of them for ministering to you; 9 and when present with you and in want, I
was a burden to none; for the brethren, when they came from Macedonia,
fully supplied my :want; and in everything I kept myself without burden to
you, and will keep. 10 Christ’s truth is in me, that this :glorying in the regions
of :Achaia shall not be closed against me. 11 Wherefore? because I love
you not? :God knoweth. 12 But what I do, I also will do, that I may cut
off the occasion of them that desire occasion that wherein they glory, they
be found even as we. 13 For :such are false apostles, deceitful workers,
fashioning themselves into apostles of Christ. 14 And no marvel; for the
very Satan fashioneth himself into an angel of light. 15 No great thing
therefore if his :ministers also fashion themselves as ministers of
righteousness; whose :end shall be according to their :works.
16 I say again, Let no one think me foolish; but if ye do, yet as foolish
receive me, that I also may glory a little. 17 What I speak, I speak not after
the Lord, but as in foolishness, in this :confidence of the glorying. 18 Since
many glory after the flesh, I will glory also. 19 For ye bear with the foolish
gladly, being wise. 20 For ye bear with one, if he enslave you, if he
devoureth, if he taketh you, if he exalteth himself, if he smiteth you on the
face. 21 I speak by disparagement, as though WE had been weak. Yet
whereinsoever any is bold (I speak in foolishness), I am bold also. 22 Are
they Hebrews? I also. Are they Israelites? I also. Are they Abraham’s
seed? I also. 23 Are they ministers of Christ? (I speak as one beside
himself) I more; in toils more abundantly, in prisons more abundantly, in
stripes above measure, in deaths oft. 24 Of the Jews I received forty stripes
save one five times; 25 was beaten thrice, was stoned once, suffered
shipwreck thrice, a night and a day have I been in the deep; 26 in
journeyings oft, in perils of rivers, perils of robbers, perils from my race,
perils from the nations, perils in city, perils in wilderness, perils at sea, perils
among false brethren; 27 in toil and travail, in watchings oft, in hunger and
thirst, in fastings oft, in cold and nakedness. 28 Besides the things without,
there is :what presseth upon me :daily, the anxiety for all the churches.
29 Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is stumbled, and I burn not? 30 If
I must glory, I will glory of the things of my :weakness. 31 The God and
Father of the Lord Jesus, who is blessed unto the ages, knoweth that I lie
not. 32 In Damascus the governor under Aretas the king guarded the city of
the Damascenes to take me: 33 and through a window was I let down in a
basket through the wall, and escaped his :hands.

Chapter 12
1 I must glory, though it is not expedient; but I will come to visions
and revelations of the Lord. 2 I know a man in Christ, fourteen years ago
(whether in the body, I know not; whether out of the body, I know not; :God
knoweth), :such a one caught up even to the third heaven. 3 And I
know :such a man (whether in the body, or apart from the body, I know
not; :God knoweth), 4 how that he was caught up into :Paradise, and heard
unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for man to speak. 5 On behalf of
the such I will glory: but on mine own behalf I will not glory, save
in :weaknesses. 6 For if I should desire to glory, I shall not be foolish; for I
shall speak truth: but I forbear, lest any one should account of me above
what he seeth me to be, or heareth from me, 7 and by reason of the
exceeding greatness of the revelations. Wherefore that I be not exalted
overmuch, a thorn in the flesh was given me, a messenger of Satan to buffet
me, that I be not exalted overmuch. 8 Concerning this I besought the Lord
thrice, that it might depart from me. 9 And he said to me, My :grace is
sufficient for thee: for the power is made perfect in weakness. Most
gladly therefore will I rather glory in :weaknesses, that the power of the
Christ may spread a tabernacle over me. 10 Wherefore I take pleasure in
weaknesses, in injuries, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses, for
Christ’s sake: for when I am weak, then am I strong.
11 I am become foolish: ye compelled me; for I ought to have been
commended of you: for in nothing was I behind the chiefest apostles,
though I am nothing. 12 Indeed the signs of the apostle were wrought
among you in all patience, both by signs and wonders and powers. 13 For
what is there wherein ye were made inferior to the rest of the churches,
except that I myself was not a burden to you? forgive me this :wrong.
14 Lo, this is the third time I am ready to come unto you; and I will not be a
burden: for I seek not :yours, but you: for the children ought not to lay up for
the parents, but the parents for the children. 15 And I will most gladly spend
and be expended for your :souls. If I love you more abundantly, am I loved
less? 16 But be it so, I did not myself burden you; but, being crafty, I took
you with guile. 17 Did I take advantage of you by any one of them whom I
have sent unto you? 18 I exhorted Titus, and I sent the brother along. Did
Titus take advantage of you? walked we not in the same spirit? not in the
same steps? 19 Ye think all the while that we are excusing ourselves to
you. Before God speak we in Christ. But all the things, beloved, are for
your :edifying. 20 For I fear, lest when I come, I somehow find you not such
as I would, and should myself be found of you such as ye would not; lest
somehow there be strife, jealousy, wraths, factions, backbitings,
whisperings, puffings up, tumults; 21 lest again when I come my :God
should humble me before you, and I should mourn for many of them that
have sinned heretofore, and repented not of the uncleanness and
fornication and lasciviousness which they wrought.

Chapter 13
1 This is the third time I am coming unto you. At the mouth of two
witnesses or three shall every word be established. 2 I have said before,
and am telling before, as when present the second time, so now, absent, to
them that have sinned afore, and to all the rest, that, if I come :again, I will
not spare: 3 since ye seek proof of the Christ that speaketh in me; who unto
you is not weak, but is powerful in you: 4 for though he was crucified from
weakness, yet he liveth from the power of God. For we also are weak in him,
yet shall we live with him from God’s power toward you. 5 Test yourselves,
whether ye are in the faith; prove yourselves. Or know ye not as to
yourselves, that Jesus Christ is in you? unless indeed ye be disapproved.
6 But I hope that ye shall know that WE are not disapproved. 7 Now we pray
unto :God that ye do no evil; not that we may appear approved, but that ye
may do what is honorable, though we be as disapproved. 8 For we can do
nothing against the truth, but for the truth. 9 For we rejoice, when we be
weak, and ye be strong: this we also pray for, even your :perfecting. 10 For
this cause I write these things while absent, that I may not when present
deal sharply, according to the authority which the Lord gave me for building
up and not for casting down.
11 For the rest, brethren, farewell. Be perfected; be comforted; be of
the same mind; be at peace: and the God of :love and peace shall be with
you. 12 Greet one another with a holy kiss. 13 All the saints greet you.
14 The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of :God, and the
fellowship of the Holy Spirit, be with you all.

UNTO THE GALATIANS

Chapter 1
1 PAUL, apostle (not from men, neither through man, but through Jesus
Christ, and God the Father, who raised him from the dead), 2 and all the
brethren with me, to the churches of :Galatia: 3 Grace to you and peace
from God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, 4 who gave himself for
our :sins, that he deliver us from the present evil :age, according to the will
of :God and our Father: 5 to whom the glory unto the ages of the ages.
Amen.
6 I marvel that ye are so quickly removing from him that called you in
Christ’s grace unto a different gospel; 7 which is not another: only there are
some that trouble you, and wish to pervert the gospel of the Christ. 8 But
though we, or an angel from heaven, should preach to you a gospel other
than what we preached to you, let him be anathema. 9 As we have said
before, so say I now again, If any preacheth to you a gospel other than what
ye received, let him be anathema.
10 For am I now seeking men’s favor, or :God’s? or am I seeking to
please men? if I were still pleasing men, I should not be Christ’s bondman.
11 But I make known to you, brethren, as to the gospel which was preached
by me, that it is not after man. 12 For neither did I receive it from man, nor
was I taught it, but through revelation of Jesus Christ. 13 For ye have
heard of my whilom conduct in :Judaism, how that beyond measure I
persecuted the church of :God, and made havoc of it: 14 and I advanced in
Judaism beyond many of mine own age among my :race, being more
exceedingly zealous for the traditions of my fathers. 15 But when it was
God’s good pleasure who separated me from my mother’s womb and called
me through his :grace, 16 to reveal his :Son in me, that I preach him among
the nations; straightway I conferred not with flesh and blood: 17 neither went
I up to Jerusalem unto the apostles before me, but went away into Arabia,
and again returned unto Damascus. 18 Then after three years I went up to
Jerusalem to visit Cephas, and tarried with him fifteen days. 19 But other of
the apostles saw I none, but only James the brother of the Lord. 20 Now
touching the things which I write you, lo, before :God, that I lie not. 21 Then
I came into the regions of :Syria and :Cilicia. 22 And I was unknown by :face
to the churches of :Judæa which were in Christ: 23 but they had only been
hearing [that], Who once persecuted us now preacheth the faith of which he
once made havoc; 24 and they glorified :God in me.

Chapter 2
1 Then after fourteen years I went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas,
taking also Titus along with me. 2 And I went up by revelation; and I laid
before them the gospel which I preach among the nations but privately
before those of repute, lest I somehow be running, or had run, in vain. 3 But
not even Titus who was with me, being a Greek, was compelled to be
circumcised: 4 and that because of the false brethren privily brought in, who
came in privily to spy out :our liberty which we have in Christ Jesus, that
they might bring us into bondage: 5 to whom we yielded in subjection, no,
not for an hour; that the truth of the gospel might continue with you. 6 But
from those of some repute (whatsoever they were, it maketh no difference
to me: :God accepteth not man’s person)—those of repute imparted nothing
to me: 7 but contrariwise, when they saw that I had been entrusted with the
gospel of the uncircumcision, even as Peter with that of the circumcision 8
(for who wrought for Peter unto apostleship of the circumcision wrought for
me also unto the nations); 9 and perceiving the grace :given me, James and
Cephas and John, who were reputed to be pillars, gave me and Barnabas
right hands of fellowship, that we go unto the nations, and they unto the
circumcision; 10 only they would that we remember the poor; which
selfsame thing I also gave diligence to do. 11 But when Cephas came to
Antioch, I withstood him to the face, because he was condemned. 12 For
before that certain came from James, he ate with the nations; but when they
came, he drew back and separated himself, fearing them of the
circumcision. 13 And the rest of the Jews dissembled likewise with him; so
that Barnabas also was carried away with the dissimulation. 14 But when I
saw that they walked not uprightly according to the truth of the gospel, I said
to :Cephas before all, If thou, being a Jew, livest as Gentiles, and livest not
as Jews, how compellest thou the nations to be as Jews? 15 We Jews
by nature, and not sinners of the nations, 16 yet knowing that a man is not
justified by works of law except through faith in Jesus Christ, even
we :believed unto Christ Jesus, that we might be justified by faith in Christ,
and not by works of law: because by works of law shall no flesh be justified.
17 But if, seeking to be justified in Christ, we ourselves also were found
sinners, is Christ then minister of sin? Be it not so. 18 For if I build up again
what things I destroyed, I prove myself transgressor. 19 For I through law
died to law, that I might live to God. 20 I have been crucified with Christ; and
no longer I live, but Christ liveth in me: and what I now live in the flesh I live
by faith which is in the Son of :God, who loved me, and gave himself up for
me. 21 I make not void the grace of :God: for if righteousness is through law,
then Christ died for nought.

Chapter 3
1 O foolish Galatians, who bewitched you, before whose eyes Jesus
Christ was openly set forth crucified? 2 This only would I learn from you,
Received ye the Spirit from works of law, or from hearing of faith? 3 Are ye
so foolish? having begun in Spirit, are ye now perfected in flesh? 4 Did ye
suffer so many things in vain? if indeed in vain. 5 Who therefore supplieth
you the Spirit, and worketh miracles among you, is it from works of law, or
from the hearing of faith? 6 Even as Abraham believed :God, and it was
reckoned to him for righteousness.
7 Know then that who are from faith, these are sons of Abraham.
8 And the scripture, foreseeing that :God justifieth the nations by faith,
preached the gospel afore to Abraham, saying, [that] In thee shall all the
nations be blessed. 9 So then who are from faith are blessed with the
faithful Abraham. 10 For as many as are of works of law are under a
curse: for it is written [that], Cursed everyone who continueth not in all the
things written in the book of the law, to do them. 11 Now that no one is
justified by law before :God, is evident: because, The righteous shall live by
faith; 12 and the law is not of faith: but, Who doeth them shall live in them.
13 Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law, having become a curse for
us; because it is written, Accursed every one hanging on a tree: 14 that unto
the nations might come the blessing of Abraham in Christ Jesus; that we
might receive the promise of the Spirit through :faith. 15 Brethren, I
speak after man’s manner. Though but man’s covenant, no one maketh it
void, or addeth thereto when confirmed. 16 Now to :Abraham were the
promises spoken, and to his :seed. He saith not, And to seeds, as of many;
but as of one, And to thy :seed, which is Christ. 17 Now this I say: A
covenant confirmed before by :God, the law, which came to be four hundred
and thirty years after, doth not disannul, to make the promise void. 18 For if
the inheritance is of law, it is no more of promise: but :God hath granted it
to :Abraham by promise. 19 What therefore is the law? It was added
because of transgressions, till the seed come to whom the promise hath
been made: ordained through angels by a mediator’s hand. 20 Now not of
one is the mediator; but :God is one. 21 Is the law then against the promises
of God? Be it not so: for if a law had been given which could make alive,
verily :righteousness would have been by law. 22 But the scripture shut
up :all things under sin, that the promise from faith in Jesus Christ might be
given to the believing.
23 But before the faith came, we were kept in ward under law, shut up
unto the faith to be revealed. 24 So that the law is become our tutor unto
Christ, that we be justified from faith. 25 But the faith having come, we are
no more under a tutor. 26 For ye are all sons of God, through the faith,
in Christ Jesus. 27 For as many of you as were baptized into Christ did put
on Christ. 28 There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free,
there is no male and female; for ye all are one man in Christ Jesus. 29 And
if ye are Christ’s, then are ye :Abraham’s seed, heirs according to promise.

Chapter 4
1 But I say that so long time as the heir is a babe, he differeth nothing from a
bondman, though lord of all; 2 but is under guardians and stewards until the
father’s appointed day. 3 So we also, when we were babes, were in
bondage under the rudiments of the world: 4 but when the fulness of the
time came, :God sent forth his :Son, born of woman, born under law, 5 that
he might redeem those under law, that we might receive the adoption of
sons. 6 And because ye are sons, :God sent forth the Spirit of his :Son
into our :hearts, crying, Abba, the Father. 7 So that thou art no longer
bondman, but son; and if son, then heir through God.
8 However, then indeed not knowing God ye were in bondage to
them that by nature are no gods: 9 but now knowing God, or rather being
known by God, how turn ye back again to the weak and poor elements,
whereunto ye desire to be in bondage over again? 10 Ye observe days and
months and seasons and years. 11 I am afraid of you, lest somehow I have
toiled over you in vain.
12 I beseech you, brethren, become as I; for I also am as ye. Ye did
me no wrong: 13 but ye know that because of infirmity of the flesh I
preached the gospel to you the former time: 14 and the temptation to you in
my :flesh ye despised not, nor rejected; but ye received me as God’s angel,
as Christ Jesus. 15 Where then is your :gratulation? for I bear you witness,
that, if possible, ye would have plucked out your :eyes and given them to me.
16 So then am I become your enemy, by telling you truth? 17 They are
zealous for you in no good way; but desire to shut you out, that ye be
zealous for them. 18 But it is good to be zealously sought in a good matter
always, and not only when I am present with you. 19 My little children, of
whom I am again in travail until Christ be formed in you—20 but I could wish
to be present with you now, and to change my :voice; for I am perplexed
about you.
21 Tell me, ye that desire to be under law, hear ye not the law?
22 For it is written, that Abraham had two sons, one by the maid, and one by
the freewoman. 23 But he of the maid is born after the flesh; and he of the
freewoman, through promise. 24 Which things contain an allegory: for these
are two covenants: the one from mount Sinai, bearing unto bondage, which
is Hagar. 25 Now this, Hagar, is mount Sinai in :Arabia, and answereth to
the Jerusalem that now is: for she is in bondage with her :children. 26 But
the Jerusalem above is free, which is our mother, 27 For it is written,
Rejoice, thou barren that bearest not;
Break forth and cry, thou that travailest not:
For more are the children of the desolate than of her that hath the
husband.
28 Now we, brethren, are as Isaac children of promise. 29 But just as then
who was born after the flesh persecuted the one after the Spirit, so also now.
30 But what saith the scripture? Cast out the maid and her :son: for the son
of the maid shall not inherit with the son of the freewoman. 31 Wherefore,
brethren, we are not a maid’s children, but the freewoman’s.

Chapter 5
1 For :freedom did Christ set us free: stand fast therefore, and be not
entangled again in a yoke of bondage.
2 Behold, I Paul say to you, that, if ye receive circumcision, Christ will
profit you nothing. 3 And I testify again to every man circumcised, that he is
debtor to do the whole law. 4 Ye are severed from Christ, ye who would be
justified by law; ye are fallen away from :grace. 5 For we through the Spirit
by faith wait for the hope of righteousness. 6 For in Christ Jesus neither
circumcision availeth anything, nor uncircumcision; but faith working
through love. 7 Ye were running well; who hindered you that ye should
not obey truth? 8 The persuasion is not of him that calleth you. 9 A little
leaven leaveneth the whole lump. 10 I have confidence toward you in the
Lord, that ye will be none otherwise minded: but who troubleth you shall
bear the judgment, whoever he be. 11 But I, brethren, if I still preach
circumcision, why am I still persecuted? then hath the stumblingblock of the
cross been done away. 12 I would that they that unsettle you would even
mutilate themselves.
13 For ye, brethren, were called for freedom; only use not the
freedom for an occasion to the flesh, but through love be bondmen one to
another. 14 For the whole law is fulfilled in one word, in the, Thou shalt love
thy :neighbor as thyself. 15 But if ye bite and devour one another look that
ye be not consumed one of another. 16 But I say, Walk in Spirit, and ye
shall in no wise fulfill the lusts of the flesh. 17 For the flesh lusteth against
the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; for these are contrary one to
another; that ye may not do what things ye would. 18 But if ye are led by the
Spirit, ye are not under law. 19 Now the works of the flesh are manifest,
which are: fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, 20 idolatry, sorcery,
enmities, strife, jealousy, wraths, factions, divisions, heresies, 21 envyings,
drunkennesses, revelings, and the like of these; of which I forewarn you, as
also I did forewarn, that they who practise such things shall not inherit God’s
kingdom. 22 But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering,
kindness, goodness, faithfulness 23 gentleness, self control; against :such
there is no law. 24 And they of Christ Jesus have crucified the flesh with the
passions and the lusts. 25 If we live by the Spirit, by the Spirit let us also
walk. 26 Let us not become vainglorious, provoking one another, envying
one another.

Chapter 6
1 Brethren, even if a man be overtaken in any trespass, ye the spiritual,
restore such a one in a spirit of gentleness; looking to thyself, lest thou also
be tempted. 2 Bear the burdens of one another, and so fulfill the law of the
Christ. 3 For if one thinketh himself to be something, being nothing, he
deceiveth himself. 4 But let each prove his own :work, and then shall he
have the glorying for himself alone, and not of the other. 5 For each shall
bear his own :burden. 6 But let him that is taught in the word share in all
good things with him that teacheth. 7 Be not deceived; God is not
mocked: for whatever a man soweth, that shall he also reap. 8 Because
who soweth unto his own :flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption; but who
soweth unto the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap eternal life. 9 And let us not be
weary in the well-doing: for in its own season we shall reap, if we faint not.
10 So then, as we have opportunity, let us work the good toward all, and
especially toward them of the household of the faith.
11 See with how large letters I have written you with my own hand.
12 As many as desire to make a fair show in the flesh, compel you to be
circumcised; only that they be not persecuted for the cross of :Christ Jesus.
13 For not even who receive circumcision keep the law themselves; but they
desire to have you circumcised, that they may glory in your :flesh. 14 But far
be it from me to glory, save in the cross of our :Lord Jesus Christ, through
which the world hath been crucified to me, and I to the world. 15 For neither
is circumcision anything, nor uncircumcision, but a new creation. 16 And as
many as shall walk by this :rule, peace upon them, and mercy, and upon the
Israel of :God.
17 Henceforth let no one trouble me; for I bear on my :body the marks
of :Jesus.
18 The Grace of our :Lord Jesus Christ be with your :spirit, brethren.
Amen.

UNTO THE EPHESIANS

Chapter 1
1 PAUL, apostle of Christ Jesus through God’s will, to the saints that are at
Ephesus and faithful in Christ Jesus: 2 Grace to you and peace from God
our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
3 Blessed the God and Father of our :Lord Jesus Christ, who hath
blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ: 4 even
as he chose us in him before the world’s foundation, that we be holy and
without blemish before him in love 5 having foreordained us unto adoption
as sons through Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the good pleasure
of his :will, 6 to the praise of the glory of his :grace, which he freely bestowed
on us in the Beloved: 7 in whom we have the redemption through his :blood,
the forgiveness of :trespasses, according to the riches of his :grace, 8 which
he made to abound toward us in all wisdom and prudence, 9 having made
known to us the mystery of his :will, according to his :good pleasure which
he purposed in him 10 unto a dispensation of the fulness of the seasons, to
sum up :all things in the Christ, those upon the heavens, and those upon the
earth; in him 11 in whom also we were made a heritage, foreordained
according to the purpose of him who worketh :all things after the counsel of
his :will; 12 that we be unto praise of his glory, we who had before hoped in
the Christ: 13 in whom ye also, having heard the word of the truth, the
gospel of your :salvation,—in whom, having also believed, ye were sealed
with the Holy :Spirit of the promise, 14 which is an earnest of our :inheritance,
unto redemption of the possession, unto praise of his :glory.
15 For this cause I also, having heard of the faith in the Lord Jesus
which is among you, and which is toward all the saints, 16 cease not to give
thanks for you, making mention in my :prayers; 17 that the God of our :Lord
Jesus Christ, the Father of the glory, give you a spirit of wisdom and
revelation in knowledge of him; 18 having the eyes of the heart :enlightened,
that ye may know what is the hope of his :calling, what the riches of the glory
of his :inheritance in the saints, 19 and what the exceeding greatness of
his :power toward us who believe, according to that working of the strength
of his :might 20 which he wrought in the Christ, when he raised him from the
dead, and made him to sit at his right in the heavenlies, 21 far above all rule,
and authority, and power, and dominion, and every name named not only in
this :age, but also in the one to come: 22 and he put all things in subjection
under his :feet, and gave him for a head over all things to the church,
23 which is his :body, the fulness of him that filleth :all in all.

Chapter 2
1 And you he quickened, when ye were dead through your :trespasses
and :sins, 2 wherein ye once walked according to the age of this :world,
according to the prince of the power of the air, of the spirit that now worketh
in the sons of :disobedience; 3 among whom we also all once lived in the
lusts of our :flesh, doing the desires of the flesh and of the thoughts, and
were by nature children of wrath, even as the rest:—4 but :God, being rich in
mercy, for his great :love wherewith he loved us, 5 even when we were dead
through the trespasses made us alive together with the Christ (by grace
have ye been saved), 6 and raised us up with him, and made us to sit with
him in the heavenlies, in Christ Jesus: 7 that in the ages :to come he might
show the exceeding riches of his :grace in kindness toward us in Christ
Jesus: 8 for by :grace have ye been saved through faith; and this not of
yourselves, it is the gift of God; 9 not of works, that no one should glory. 10
For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus upon good works,
which :God afore prepared that we should walk in them.
11 Wherefore remember, that once ye, the nations in the flesh, who
are called Uncircumcision by what is called Circumcision in the flesh made
by hands; 12 that ye were at that :season apart from Christ, alienated from
the commonwealth of :Israel, and strangers to the covenants of the promise,
having no hope and without God in the world. 13 But now in Christ Jesus ye
that once were far off are become nigh in the blood of the Christ. 14 For HE
is our :peace, who made :both one, and brake down the middle wall of the
partition, 15 having abolished in his :flesh the enmity, the law of the
commandments contained in ordinances; that he might create in himself of
the two one new man, making peace; 16 and might reconcile :both in one
body to :God through the cross, having slain the enmity thereby: 17 and he
came and preached peace to you the far off, and peace to the nigh:
18 because through him we :both have the access in one Spirit unto the
Father. 19 So then ye are no more strangers and sojourners, but are
fellow-citizens with the saints, and of :God’s household, 20 being built upon
the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Christ Jesus himself being
chief corner stone; 21 in whom every building, fitly framed together, groweth
into a holy temple in the Lord; 22 in whom ye also are builded together into a
habitation of :God in Spirit.

Chapter 3
1 For this cause I Paul, the prisoner of the Christ, Jesus, in behalf of
you :nations,—2 if so that ye have heard of the dispensation of the grace
of :God :given me toward you; 3 how that by revelation was made known to
me the mystery, as I wrote afore in few words, 4 whereby, when ye read, ye
can perceive my :understanding in the mystery of the Christ; 5 which in
other generations was not made known to the sons of :men as it hath now
been revealed to his holy :apostles and prophets in Spirit: 6 that the nations
are fellow-heirs, and fellow-bodied and fellow-partakers of the promise in
Christ Jesus through the gospel, 7 whereof I became a minister, according
to the gift of the grace of :God :given me according to the working of
his :power 8 (to me, the least of all saints, was this :grace given), to preach
to the nations the unsearchable riches of the Christ 9 and to bring to light
what is the dispensation of the mystery :hid for the ages in :God who
created :all things; in order 10 that now unto the principalities and the
powers in the heavenlies be made known through the church the manifold
wisdom of :God, 11 according to a plan of the ages which he made in the
Christ, Jesus our Lord: 12 in whom we have :boldness and access in
confidence through his :faith. 13 Wherefore I ask not to faint at
my :tribulations for you, which is your glory. 14 For this cause I bow
my :knees unto the Father, 15 from whom all fatherhood in heavens and on
the earth is named, 16 that he give you, according to the riches of his :glory,
to be made mighty through his :Spirit unto the inward man; 17 that the Christ
dwell in your :hearts through :faith in love, rooted and grounded, 18 so that
ye be strong to apprehend with all the saints what the breadth and length
and depth and height, 19 and to know the love of the Christ which
passeth :knowledge, that ye be filled unto all the fulness of :God.
20 Now to the one able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we
ask or think, according to the power that worketh in us, 21 to him the glory in
the church and in Christ Jesus unto all the generations of the age of the
ages. Amen.

Chapter 4
1 I therefore, the prisoner in the Lord, beseech you to walk worthily of
the calling wherewith ye were called, 2 with all lowliness and gentleness,
with longsuffering, forbearing one another in love; 3 giving diligence to keep
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of :peace. 4 There is one body, and one
Spirit, even as also ye were called in one hope of your :calling; 5 one Lord,
one faith, one baptism, 6 one God and Father of all, who is over all, and
through all, and in all. 7 But to each of us was the grace given according to
the measure of the gift of the Christ. 8 Wherefore he saith,
When he ascended on high, he led captivity captive,
And gave gifts to :men.
9 (Now the He ascended, what is it but that He also descended into the
lower parts of the earth? 10 Who descended is the same also that
ascended far above all the heavens, that he might fill :all things.) 11 And HE
gave some as apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and
some, shepherds and teachers; 12 for the perfecting of the saints, unto a
work of ministry, unto a building of the body of the Christ: 13 till we :all attain
unto the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of :God, unto a
perfect man, unto a measure of stature of the fulness of the Christ: 14 that
we no longer be babes, tossed to and fro and carried about with every wind
of :teaching, by the sleight of :men, in craftiness, unto the wiles of :error;
15 but being true in love, may grow up in :all things into him, who is the head,
Christ; 16 from whom all the body fitly framed and knit together through
every joint of the supply, according to the working in measure of each
several part, maketh the increase of the body unto the building up of itself in
love.
17 This I say therefore, and testify in the Lord, that ye no longer
should walk as the nations also walk, in the vanity of their mind, 18 being
darkened in their understanding, alienated from the life of :God, because of
the ignorance that is in them, because of the hardening of their :heart; 19
who being past feeling gave themselves up to :lasciviousness, to work all
uncleanness with covetousness. 20 But ye did not so learn the Christ; 21 if
so that ye heard of him, and were taught in him, even as truth is in :Jesus:
22 that ye put away, as concerning your former behavior, the old man, that
waxeth corrupt after the lusts of :deceit; 23 and that ye be renewed in the
spirit of your :mind, 24 and put on the new man, that after God hath been
created in righteousness and holiness of the truth.
25 Wherefore, putting away the lie speak truth each with
his :neighbor: for we are members one of another. 26 Be angry, and sin not:
let not the sun go down upon your wrath: 27 neither give place to the devil.
28 Let him that steals steal no more: but rather let him toil, working with
his :hands what is good, that he have whereof to give to him that hath need.
29 Let no corrupt speech proceed out of your :mouth, but such as is good for
building up of the need, that it give grace to them that hear. 30 And grieve
not the Holy :Spirit of :God, in whom ye were sealed unto a day of
redemption. 31 Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and
railing, be put away from you, with all malice: 32 and be kind one to another,
tenderhearted, forgiving each other, even as :God also in Christ forgave
you.

Chapter 5
1 Be therefore imitators of :God, as beloved children; 2 and walk in love,
even as the Christ also loved you, and gave himself up for you, an offering
and sacrifice to :God for an odor of a sweet smell. 3 But fornication, and
all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not even be named among you, as
becometh saints; 4 nor filthiness, nor foolish talking, or jesting, which are not
befitting: but rather thanksgiving. 5 For this ye know and perceive that no
fornicator, nor unclean, nor covetous man (which is an idolater), hath any
inheritance in the kingdom of the Christ and God.
6 Let no one deceive you with empty words: for because of these
cometh the wrath of :God upon the sons of :disobedience. 7 Become not
therefore partakers with them; 8 for ye were once darkness, but are now
light in the Lord: walk as children of light 9 (for the fruit of the light is in all
goodness and righteousness and truth), 10 proving what is well-pleasing to
the Lord; 11 and have no fellowship with the unfruitful :works of :darkness,
but rather even reprove them; 12 for the things done by them in secret it is a
shame even to speak of. 13 But :all things when reproved are manifested by
the light: for everything :manifested is light. 14 Wherefore it saith,
Awake, thou that sleepest,
And arise from the dead,
And the Christ shall shine upon thee.
15 Look therefore carefully how ye walk, not as unwise, but as wise;
16 redeeming the season, because the days are evil. 17 Therefore become
not foolish, but understand what the will of the Lord is. 18 And be not
drunken with wine, wherein is riot, but be filled with the Spirit; 19 speaking to
yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and psalming
with your :heart to the Lord; 20 thanking always for all in our Lord Jesus
Christ’s name the God and Father; 21 subjecting yourselves one to another
in fear of Christ. 22 :Wives, be subject to your own husbands, as to the
Lord, 23 because the husband is the wife’s head as also the Christ is head
of the church, himself savior of the body. 24 But as the church is subject to
the Christ, so the wives be also to their husbands in everything.
25 :Husbands, love the wives, even as the Christ also loved the church, and
gave himself up for it; 26 that he might sanctify it, having cleansed it by the
washing of the water with the word, 27 that himself might present to himself
the church glorious, not having spot or wrinkle or any :such thing; but that it
be holy and without blemish. 28 Thus ought the husbands also to love their
own wives as their own bodies. Who loveth his own :wife loveth himself:
29 for no one ever hated his own :flesh; but nourisheth and cherisheth it,
even as the Christ also the church; 30 because we are members of his :body.
31 For this cause shall a man leave :father and :mother, and shall cleave to
his :wife; and the two shall be one flesh. 32 This :mystery is great: but I
speak in regard to Christ and the church. 33 Nevertheless love ye also
severally each his own :wife even as himself; and the wife see that she fear
the husband.

Chapter 6
1 :Children, obey your :parents in the Lord: for this is right. 2 Honor
thy :father and :mother (which is the commandment first with promise),
3 that it be well with thee, and thou be long-lived on the earth. 4 And, ye, the
fathers, provoke not your :children to wrath: but nurture them in the Lord’s
chastening and admonition. 5 :Bondmen, be obedient to the lords,
according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of your :heart,
as unto the Christ; 6 not in eyeservice, as men-pleasers; but as bondmen of
Christ, doing the will of :God from the soul 7 with good will; doing service, as
to the Lord, and not to men: 8 knowing that whatsoever good each doeth,
the same shall he receive again from the Lord, whether bond or free. 9 And,
ye, the lords, do the same things unto them, forbearing :threatening:
knowing that the Lord of both them and you is in the heavens, and no
respect of persons is with him.
10 For the rest, be strong in the Lord, and in the might of his: strength.
11 Put on the whole armor of :God, that ye be able to stand against the wiles
of the devil. 12 For our :wrestling is not against blood and flesh, but against
the principalities, against the authorities, against the world-rulers of
this :darkness, against the spirituals of the wickedness in the heavenlies.
13 Wherefore take up the whole armor of :God, that ye be able to withstand
in the evil :day, and, having done all thoroughly, to stand.
14 Stand therefore, having girded your :loin with truth, and put on the
breastplate of :righteousness, 15 and shod your :feet with preparation of the
gospel of :peace; 16 in all things taking up the shield of the faith, wherewith
ye shall be able to quench all the fiery :darts of the evil one. 17 And receive
the helmet of :salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is God’s word: 18
with all prayer and supplication praying at every season in the Spirit, and
watching thereunto in all perseverance and supplication for all the saints,
19 and on my behalf, that utterance be given me in opening my :mouth with
boldness to make known the mystery of the gospel, 20 for which I am
ambassador in a chain; that in it I may be bold, as I ought to speak.
21 But that ye also may know my :affairs, how I do, Tychicus, the
beloved brother and faithful minister in the Lord, shall make known to you all
things: 22 whom I have sent unto you for this very purpose, that ye may
know :our state, and that he comfort your :hearts.
23 Peace to the brethren, and love with faith, from God the Father
and the Lord Jesus Christ. 24 The grace be with all that love our :Lord Jesus
Christ in incorruption.

TO THE PHILIPPIANS

Chapter 1
1 PAUL AND TIMOTHY bondmen of Christ Jesus, to all the saints in Christ
Jesus that are at Philippi, with overseers and deacons: 2 Grace to you and
peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
3 I thank my :God upon all my 4 :remembrance of you always in every
supplication of mine on behalf of you all making my supplication with joy,
5 for your :fellowship unto the gospel from the first day until :now; 6 confident
of this very thing, that he who began a good work in you will perfect it until
Jesus Christ’s day: 7 even as it is right for me to think thus on behalf of you
all, because I have you in my :heart; as, both in my :bonds and in the
defence and confirmation of the gospel, ye all are partakers with me
of :grace. 8 For :God is my witness, how I long after you all in tender
mercies of Christ Jesus. 9 And this I pray, that your :love abound yet more
and more in knowledge and all discernment; 10 so that ye may approve the
things excellent; that ye be sincere and void of offence unto Christ’s day;
11 filled with fruit of righteousness, which is through Jesus Christ, unto
God’s praise and glory.
12 Now I would have you know, brethren, that the happenings unto
me have come out rather unto progress of the gospel; 13 so that my bonds
became manifest in Christ in the whole praetorium, and to all the rest;
14 and that the more part of the brethren in the Lord, confident through my
bonds, are more abundantly bold to speak the word of :God without fear.
15 Some indeed preach the Christ even of envy and strife; and some also of
good will: 16 the ones do it of love, knowing that I am set for the gospel’s
defence; 17 but the others proclaim the Christ of faction, not sincerely,
thinking to raise up affliction for me in my :bonds. 18 What then? only that in
every way, whether in pretence or in truth, Christ is proclaimed; and therein
I rejoice, yea, and will rejoice; 19 for I know that this shall turn out to my
salvation, through your supplication and supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ,
20 according to my earnest :expectation and hope, that in nothing shall I be
shamed, but with all boldness, as always, now also Christ shall be
magnified in my :body, whether by life, or by death. 21 For to me :to live
is Christ, and to :die gain. 22 But if :to live in the flesh,─if this bring fruit from
my work,─and what I shall choose I know not. 23 But I am in a strait betwixt
the two, having the desire :to depart and be with Christ; for it is very far
better: 24 yet to abide in the flesh is more needful for you. 25 And having this
confidence, I know that I shall abide, yea, and abide with you all, for
your :progress and joy of the faith; 26 that your :glorying abound in Christ
Jesus in me through my :presence with you again. 27 Only let your
manner of life be worthy of the gospel of the Christ: that, whether I come
and see you or be absent, I may hear of your state, that ye stand fast in one
spirit, with one soul striving together for the faith of the gospel; 28 and in
nothing affrighted by the adversaries: (which is for them evidence of
destruction, but of your salvation, and that from God; 29 because to you it
hath been granted in the behalf of Christ, not only :to believe unto him, but
also :to suffer in his behalf): 30 having the same conflict, such as ye saw in
me, and now hear in me.

Chapter 2
1 If therefore any exhortation is in Christ, if any consolation of love, if
any fellowship of Spirit, if any tender mercies and compassions, 2 make full
my joy, that ye think the same, having the same love, being of one soul,
of :one mind; 3 doing nothing through faction or through vainglory, but
in :lowliness of mind counting one another better than themselves; 4 not
looking each severally to his :own things, but each severally also to those of
others. 5 Have this mind in you, which was also in Christ Jesus 6 :who,
existing in God’s form, counted not the being on an equality with God aught
to be grasped at, 7 but emptied himself, taking a bondman’s form, being
made in likeness of men; 8 and being found in fashion as a man, he
humbled himself, becoming obedient unto death, yea, death of the cross.
9 Wherefore also :God highly exalted him, and endowed him with the
name :above every name; 10 that in the name of Jesus every knee should
bow, of things in heaven and on earth and under the earth, 11 and that every
tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to God the Father’s glory.
12 So that, my beloved, even as ye have always obeyed, not as in
my :presence only, but now much rather in my :absence, work out your
own :salvation with fear and trembling; 13 for it is God who worketh in you
both :to will and :to work, for his good :pleasure. 14 Do all things without
murmurings and questionings; 15 that ye may become blameless and
harmless, children of God without blemish in the midst of a crooked and
perverse generation, among whom ye are seen as luminaries in the world,
16 holding forth the word of life; that I may have whereof to glory in Christ’s
day, that I did not run in vain neither toil in vain. 17 Yea, and if I am offered
upon the sacrifice and service of your :faith, I rejoice, and rejoice with you all:
18 and in the same manner rejoice ye and rejoice with me.
19 But I hope in the Lord Jesus to send you Timothy shortly, that I
also be of good comfort, when I know your state. 20 For I have no one
likeminded, who will genuinely care for your state. 21 For they all seek
their :own, not the things of Jesus Christ. 22 But ye know the proof of him,
that, as a child to a father he served with me in the gospel. 23 HIM therefore
I hope to send forthwith, so soon as I shall see how it will go with me: 24 but
I trust in the Lord that myself also shall come shortly. 25 But I counted it
necessary to send unto you Epaphroditus, the brother and :fellow-worker
and my fellow-soldier, and your messenger and minister to my :need;
26 since he was longing to see you all, and was sore troubled, because ye
had heard that he was sick: 27 for indeed he was sick nigh unto death:
but :God had mercy on him; and not on him only, but on me also, that I might
not have sorrow upon sorrow. 28 I have sent him therefore the more
diligently, that, seeing him again, ye may rejoice, and I be less sorrowful.
29 Receive him therefore in the Lord with all joy; and hold the such in honor:
30 because for the work of the Lord he came nigh unto death, hazarding
his :life to supply your :lack in the service toward me.

Chapter 3
1 For the rest, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord. To write the same
things to you, to me indeed is not irksome, but for you is safe. 2 Look
out for the dogs, look out for the evil workers, look out for the concision: 3 for
we are the circumcision, who worship by God’s Spirit, and glory in Christ
Jesus, and have no confidence in flesh: 4 though I myself might have
confidence even in flesh. If any other thinketh to have confidence in
flesh, I yet more: 5 circumcised the eighth day, of Israel’s race, of
Benjamin’s tribe, Hebrew of Hebrews; as touching law, a Pharisee; 6 as
touching zeal, persecuting the church; as touching righteousness which is
by law, become blameless. 7 But what things were gains to me, these have
I counted loss for the Christ. 8 Yea verily, and I count all things to be loss for
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my :Lord: for whom I
suffered loss of :all things, and count them refuse, 9 that I may gain Christ,
and be found in him, not having MY righteousness, which is of the law, but
which is through faith of Christ, the righteousness from God upon the faith:
10 that I may know him, and the power of his :resurrection, and fellowship of
his sufferings, becoming conformed to his :death; 11 if somehow I may
attain unto the out-resurrection :from the dead. 12 Not that I have already
received, or am already made perfect: but I follow on, if so be that I may
apprehend that for which also I was apprehended by Christ Jesus.
13 Brethren, I reckon not myself yet to have apprehended: but one thing,
forgetting the things behind, and stretching forward to those before, 14 I
follow on toward the mark unto the prize of the upward calling of :God in
Christ Jesus. 15 Let us therefore, as many as are perfect, be thus minded:
and if in anything ye are otherwise minded, this also shall :God reveal to you:
16 only, whereunto we have attained, by that same rule let us walk.
17 Brethren, become imitators together of me, and mark them that so walk
even as ye have us for an example. 18 For many walk, of whom I told you
often, and now tell you even weeping, they are the enemies of the cross of
the Christ: 19 whose :end is destruction, whose :god is the belly, and their
glory is in their :shame, who mind the earthly things. 20 For our :citizenship
is in the heavens, whence also we wait for a Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ:
21 who shall fashion anew the body of our :humiliation, conformed to the
body of his :glory, according to the working whereby he is able even to
subject :all things to himself.

Chapter 4
1 So that, my brethren beloved and longed for, my joy and crown,
thus stand fast in the Lord, beloved. 2 I exhort Euodia, and exhort
Syntychē, to be of the same mind in the Lord. 3 Yea, I ask thee also,
genuine yokefellow, help them, who have shared my struggles with me in
the gospel, with Clement also, and the rest of my fellow-workers, whose
names are in the book of life. 4 Rejoice in the Lord always: again I will
say, Rejoice. 5 Let your gentleness be known to all men. The Lord is near.
6 In nothing be anxious; but in everything by :prayer and :supplication with
thanksgiving let your :requests be made known unto :God. 7 And the peace
of :God, which passeth all understanding, shall guard your :hearts and
your :thoughts in Christ Jesus. 8 For the rest, brethren, whatever things
are true, whatever are honorable, whatever are just, whatever are pure,
whatever are lovely, whatever are of good report; if there be any virtue, and
if any praise, take account thereof. 9 What things ye both learned and
received and heard and saw in me, these do: and the God of :peace shall
be :with you.
10 But I rejoiced in the Lord greatly, that now at length ye have
revived your :thought for me; wherein ye did indeed take thought, but ye
lacked opportunity. 11 Not that I speak in respect of want: for I have learned,
in whatever state I am, to be content. 12 I know how to be abased, and I
know also how to abound: in everything and in all things have I learned the
secret both to be filled and to be hungry, both to abound and to be in want.
13 I can do all things in him that strengtheneth me. 14 Howbeit ye did well
that ye had fellowship with my :affliction. 15 And ye Philippians also know
that in the beginning of the gospel, when I departed from Macedonia, no
church had fellowship with me in the matter of giving and receiving but ye
only; 16 for even in Thessalonica ye sent both once and twice unto my :need.
17 Not that I seek for the gift; but I seek for the fruit that increaseth to your
account. 18 But I have all things, and abound: I am filled, having received
from Epaphroditus the things from you, an odor of sweet smell, sacrifice
acceptable, well-pleasing to :God. 19 And my :God shall supply your every
need according to his :riches in glory in Christ Jesus. 20 Now to our :God
and Father the glory unto the ages of the ages. Amen.
21 Salute every saint in Christ Jesus. The brethren with me salute
you. 22 All the saints salute you, and specially they of the household of
Cæsar.
23 The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your :spirit.

TO THE COLOSSIANS

Chapter 1
1 PAUL, apostle of Christ Jesus through God’s will, and Timothy the brother,
2 to the saints at Colossæ and faithful brethren in Christ: Grace to you and
peace from God our Father.
3 We thank :God the Father of our :Lord Jesus: Christ always praying
for you, 4 having heard of your :faith in Christ Jesus, and the love which ye
have toward all the saints, 5 because of the hope which is laid up for you in
the heavens, whereof ye heard before in the word of the truth of the gospel,
6 which is come unto you; even as it is also in all the world bearing fruit and
increasing, as in you also, from the day ye heard and knew the grace
of :God in truth; 7 even as ye learned from Epaphras our :beloved
fellow-bondman, who is a faithful minister of the Christ on your behalf, 8 who
also declared to us your :love in Spirit. 9 For this cause we also, from the
day we heard it, do not cease to pray and ask for you, that ye be filled with
the knowledge of his :will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding, 10 to
walk worthily of the Lord unto all pleasing in every good work bearing fruit,
and increasing in :knowledge of :God; 11 strengthened with all power,
according to the might of his :glory, unto all patience and longsuffering with
joy; 12 giving thanks to the Father, who fitted you to be partakers of the
inheritance of the saints in :light; 13 who delivered us out of the power
of :darkness, and translated us into the kingdom of the Son of his :love; 14 in
whom we have the redemption, the forgiveness of :sins: 15 who is the
invisible God’s image, firstborn of all creation; 16 for in him were :all things
created, in the heavens and upon the earth, the visible and the invisible,
whether thrones or dominions or principalities or powers; :all things have
been created through him, and unto him; 17 and HE is before all, and in
him :all things consist. 18 And HE is the head of the body, the church: who is
the beginning, firstborn from the dead; that in all HE might have
pre-eminence. 19 For the whole fulness was pleased to dwell in him; 20 and
through him to reconcile :all things unto him, having made peace through
the blood of his :cross: through him, whether the things upon the earth, or
those in the heavens. 21 And you, being alienated before and enemies
in :mind in the evil :works, 22 yet now hath he reconciled in the body of
his :flesh through :death, to present you holy and without blemish and
unreprovable before him: 23 if so that ye continue in the faith, grounded and
steadfast, and not moved away from the hope of the gospel which ye
heard :preached in all creation :under the :heaven; whereof I Paul became
minister.
24 Now I rejoice in my :sufferings for you, and fill up on my part what
are lacking of the afflictions of the Christ in my :flesh for his :body, which is
the church; 25 whereof I became minister, according to the dispensation
of :God :given me toward you, to fulfill the word of :God, 26 the mystery :hid
from the ages and from the generations: but now hath it been manifested to
his :saints, 27 to whom :God was pleased to make known what is the riches
of the glory of this :mystery among the nations, which is Christ in you, the
hope of :glory: 28 whom we proclaim, admonishing every man and teaching
every man in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ;
29 whereunto I also toil, striving according to his :working, which worketh in
me with power.

Chapter 2
1 For I would have you know how great a conflict I have for you, and
for them at Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my :face in the flesh;
2 that their :hearts be comforted, being knit together in love, and unto all
riches of the fulness of the understanding, unto full knowledge of the
mystery of :God, Christ, 3 in whom are all the treasures of :wisdom and
knowledge hidden. 4 This I say that no one delude you with persuasive
speech. 5 For even if I am absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit,
joying and looking at your :order, and the steadfastness of your :faith unto
Christ.
6 As therefore ye received the Christ, Jesus the Lord, walk in him,
7 rooted and builded up in him, and established in the faith, even as ye were
taught, abounding therein in thanksgiving. 8 Look out, lest any shall be
that maketh spoil of you through the philosophy and vain deceit, after the
tradition of :men, after the elements of the world, and not after Christ: 9 for in
him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily, 10 and in him ye are
made full, who is the head of all principality and power: 11 in whom ye were
also circumcised with a circumcision not made with hands, in the putting off
of the body of the flesh, in the circumcision of the Christ; 12 having been
buried with him in :baptism, wherein ye were also raised with him through
the faith of the working of :God, who raised him from the dead. 13 And you,
being dead by the trespasses and the uncircumcision of your :flesh, you did
he make alive together with him, having forgiven us all :trespasses;
14 having blotted out the handwriting against us, in :ordinances, which was
contrary to us: and he hath taken it out of the midst, nailing it to the cross;
15 having despoiled the principalities and the powers, he made a show of
them openly, triumphing over them in it.
16 Let no one therefore judge you in meat, and in drink, or in respect
of a feast day or new moon or sabbaths: 17 which are a shadow of the things
to come: but the body is the Christ’s. 18 Let no one rob you of a prize by
voluntary humility and worship of the angels, dwelling in what things he hath
seen, vainly puffed up by the mind of his :flesh 19 and not holding to the
Head, from whom all the body, being supplied and knit together through the
joints and bands, increaseth with the increase of :God.
20 If ye died with Christ from the elements of the world, why, as
though living in the world, do ye submit to ordinances, 21 Handle not, nor
taste, nor touch 22 (all which are to perish with the using), after the precepts
and teachings of :men? 23 Which things are such as have indeed a show of
wisdom in will-worship, and humility, and severity to the body; but of no
value against indulgence of the flesh.

Chapter 3
1 If then ye were raised together with the Christ, seek the things
above, where the Christ is, seated at God’s right. 2 Set your mind on the
things above, not on those :upon the earth. 3 For ye died, and your :life is
hid with the Christ in :God. 4 When the Christ, our :life, shall be manifested,
then shall ye also with him be manifested in glory.
5 Put to death therefore the members which are upon the earth:
fornication, uncleanness, passion, evil desire, and :covetousness, which is
idolatry; 6 for which cometh the wrath of :God: 7 wherein ye also once
walked, when ye lived in these; 8 but now do ye also put them all away:
anger, wrath, malice, railing, shameful speaking out of your :mouth: 9 lie not
one to another; seeing ye have put off the old man with his :doings, 10 and
have put on the new, who is being renewed unto knowledge after the image
of him that created him: 11 where is no Greek and Jew, circumcision and
uncircumcision, barbarian, Scythian, bond, free; but Christ is all, and in all.
12 Put on therefore, as chosen of :God, holy and beloved, bowels of
compassion, kindness, lowliness, meekness, longsuffering; 13 forbearing
one another, and forgiving each other, if anyone have a complaint against
any; even as the Lord forgave you, so also do ye: 14 and above all these
things put on :love, which is the bond of perfectness. 15 And let the peace of
the Christ arbitrate in your :hearts, to which also ye were called in one body;
and be ye thankful. 16 Let the word of the Christ dwell in you richly in all
wisdom, teaching and admonishing yourselves with psalms, hymns,
spiritual songs, with :grace singing in your :hearts unto :God. 17 And
whatsoever ye do, in word or in deed, do all in the Lord Jesus’ name,
thanking :God the Father through him.
18 :Wives, be subject to your :husbands, as is fitting in the Lord.
19 :Husbands, love your :wives and be not bitter against them. 20 :Children,
obey the parents in all things, for this is well-pleasing in the Lord.
21 :Fathers, provoke not your :children, that they be not discouraged.
22 :Bondmen, obey in all things the lords according to the flesh; not with
eye-services, as men-pleasers, but in singleness of heart, fearing the Lord;
23 whatsoever ye do, work from the soul, as to the Lord, and not to men;
24 knowing that from the Lord ye shall receive the recompense of the
inheritance; ye are bondmen of the Lord Christ. 25 For who doeth wrong
shall receive again the wrong he hath done: and there is no respect of
persons.

Chapter 4
1 :Lords, render to the bondmen what is just and equal; knowing that ye also
have a lord in heaven.
2 Continue steadfastly in :prayer, watching therein with thanksgiving;
3 withal praying for us also, that :God open us a door for the word, to speak
the mystery of the Christ, for which I am also in bonds; 4 that I may make it
manifest, as I ought to speak. 5 Walk in wisdom toward those :without,
redeeming the season. 6 Let your :speech be always with grace, seasoned
with salt, that ye may know how ye ought to answer each one.
7 :All my affairs shall Tychicus make known to you, the beloved
brother and faithful minister and fellow-bondman in the Lord: 8 whom I have
sent unto you for this very purpose, that ye may know :concerning us, and
that he may comfort your :hearts; 9 with Onēsimus, the faithful and beloved
brother, who is one of you. They shall make known unto you all the affairs
here.
10 Aristarchus my :fellow-prisoner greets you, and Mark, the cousin
of Barnabas (about whom ye received commandments; if he come unto you,
receive him), 11 and Jesus :called Justus, who are from the circumcision:
these my only fellow-workers unto the kingdom of :God, who have been a
comfort to me. 12 Epaphras who is one of you, bondman of Christ Jesus,
greets you, always striving for you in his :prayers, that ye may stand perfect
and fully assured in all of :God’s will. 13 For I bear him witness, that he hath
much labor for you and those in Laodicea, and those in Hierapolis. 14 Luke,
the beloved :physician, and Dēmas greet you. 15 Greet the brethren in
Laodicea, and Nympha, and the church in her house. 16 And when the
letter hath been read among you, cause that it be read also in the church of
the Laodiceans; and that ye also read the one from Laodicea. 17 And say to
Archippus, Look to the ministry which thou hast received in the Lord, that
thou fulfill it.
18 The greeting of me Paul with my :hand. Remember
my :bonds. :Grace be with you.

UNTO THE THESSALONIANS I

Chapter 1
1 PAUL and Silvanus, and Timothy, to the church of Thessalonians in God
the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ: Grace to you and peace.
2 We thank :God always for you all, making mention in our :prayers;
3 remembering without ceasing your :work of :faith and :toil of :love
and :patience of :hope in our :Lord Jesus Christ, before our :God and Father;
4 knowing, brethren beloved of :God, your :election, 5 because our :gospel
came not unto you in word only, but also in power, and in the Holy Spirit,
and much assurance; even as ye know what manner of men we became
among you for your sake. 6 And ye became imitators of us, and of the Lord,
having received the word in much tribulation, with joy of the Holy Spirit; 7 so
that ye became an example to all that believe in :Macedonia and in :Achaia.
8 For from you hath sounded forth the word of the Lord not only
in :Macedonia and Achaia, but in every place your :faith :unto God is gone
forth; so that we have no need to speak anything. 9 For THEY report
concerning us what manner of entering in we had unto you; and how ye
turned unto :God from :idols, to be bondmen of a living and true God, 10 and
to wait for his :Son from the heavens, whom he raised from the dead: Jesus,
who delivereth us from the wrath :to come.

Chapter 2
1 For yourselves, brethren, know our :entering in unto you, that it
hath not become vain: 2 but having suffered before and been shamefully
treated, as ye know, at Philippi, we waxed bold in our :God to speak unto
you the gospel of :God in much conflict. 3 For our :exhortation is not of error,
nor of uncleanness, nor in guile: 4 but even as we have been approved
of :God to be entrusted with the gospel, so we speak; not as pleasing men,
but God who proveth our :hearts. 5 For neither were we ever using words of
flattery, as ye know, nor a cloak of covetousness, God is witness; 6 nor
seeking glory of men, neither from you nor from others, though able to be a
burden as apostles of Christ. 7 But we became babes in your midst, as
when a nurse cherisheth her own :children: 8 thus longing for you, we were
well pleased to impart to you, not the gospel of :God only, but also our
own :souls, because ye were become very dear to us. 9 For ye remember,
brethren, our :toil and :travail: working night and day, that we burden not any
of you, we preached unto you the gospel of :God. 10 Ye are
witnesses, :God also, how holily and righteously and unblamably we
became toward you that believe: 11 as ye know how we were exhorting you,
each of you, as a father his own children, and encouraging, and testifying,
12 that ye should walk worthily of the God that calleth you into his
own :kingdom and glory.
13 And for this we also thank :God without ceasing, that, when ye
received from us the word of :God’s message, ye accepted it not as men’s
word, but, as it is in truth, God’s word, which also worketh in you that believe.
14 For ye, brethren, became imitators of the churches of :God which are
in :Judæ in Christ Jesus: because ye also suffered the same things of
your :own countrymen, even as THEY did of the Jews; 15 who both killed the
Lord Jesus and the prophets, and drove out us, and please not God, and
are contrary to all men; 16 hindering us from speaking to the nations that
they may be saved; to fill up their :sins always: but the wrath is come upon
them to the uttermost.
17 But we, brethren, bereaved of you for the season of an hour in
presence not in heart, endeavored the more exceedingly to see your face
with great desire:
18 because we would fain have come unto you, I Paul both once and twice,
and :Satan hindered us. 19 For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of glorying?
Are not even ye, before our :Lord Jesus at his :presence? 20 For ye are
our :glory and our :joy.

Chapter 3
1 Wherefore when we could no longer forbear, we thought it good to
be left behind at Athens alone; 2 and sent Timothy, our :brother and :God’s
minister in the gospel of the Christ, to establish you, and to comfort
concerning your :faith; 3 that no one be moved by these :afflictions; for
yourselves know that hereunto we are appointed. 4 For verily, when we
were with you, we told you afore that we are to be afflicted; even as it came
to pass, and ye know. 5 For this cause I also, when I could no longer
forbear, sent :to know your :faith, lest somehow the tempter had tempted
you, and our :labor be in vain. 6 But when Timothy came even now unto us
from you, and brought us glad tidings of your :faith and love, and that ye
have good remembrance of us always, longing to see us, even as we also
to see you; 7 for this cause, brethren, we were comforted over you in all
our :distress and affliction through your :faith: 8 for now we live, if ye stand
fast in the Lord. 9 For what thanksgiving can we render again to God for you,
for all the joy wherewith we joy for you before our :God; 10 night and day
praying exceedingly that we may see your :face, and may perfect what are
lacking in your :faith? 11 Now may :God himself and our Father, and
our :Lord Jesus, direct our :way unto you: 12 and the Lord make you to
increase and abound in :love one toward another, and toward all, even as
we also do toward you; 13 to the establishing of your :hearts unblamable in
holiness before our :God and Father, at the presence of our :Lord Jesus
with all his :saints.

Chapter 4
1 For the rest, brethren, I ask and exhort you in the Lord Jesus, that,
as ye received of us :how ye ought to walk and to please God, even as ye
do walk,—that ye abound more. 2 For ye know what charges we gave you
through the Lord Jesus. 3 For this is the will of :God, your :sanctification;
that ye abstain from :fornication; 4 that each of you know how to possess
himself of his own :vessel in sanctification and honor, 5 not in passion of lust,
even as the nations who know not :God; 6 that no one transgress, and
wrong his :brother in the matter: because the Lord is avenger in all these, as
also we forewarned you and testified. 7 For :God called us not for
uncleanness, but in sanctification. 8 Therefore who rejecteth, rejecteth not
man, but :God, who giveth his :Holy :Spirit unto you. 9 But concerning
brotherly :love ye have no need that one write you: for ye yourselves are
taught of God :to love one another; 10 for indeed ye do it toward all the
brethren :in all :Macedonia. But we exhort you, brethren, that ye
abound more; 11 and that ye be ambitious to be quiet, and to do your :own
business, and to work with your :hands, even as we charged you; 12 that ye
may walk becomingly toward them without, and have need of nothing.
13 But we would not have you ignorant, brethren, concerning them
that are asleep; that ye sorrow not, even as the rest, who have no hope.
14 For if we believe that Jesus died and rose, even so them also that are
fallen asleep will God :through Jesus bring with him. 15 For this we say to
you by the Lord’s word, that we that are alive, that are left unto the presence
of the Lord, shall in no wise precede them that are fallen asleep. 16 For the
Lord himself shall descend from heaven, with a shout, with an archangel’s
voice, and with God’s trump: and the dead in Christ shall rise first; 17 then
we that are alive, that are left, shall together with them be caught up in
clouds, to meet the Lord into the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord.
18 Wherefore comfort one another with these :words.

Chapter 5
1 But concerning the times and the seasons, brethren, ye have no
need that aught be written you. 2 For yourselves know perfectly that the
Lord’s day cometh as a thief at night. 3 But when they are saying, Peace
and safety, then sudden destruction cometh upon them, as the travail upon
the one with child; and they shall in no wise escape. 4 But ye, brethren, are
not in darkness, that the day should overtake you as thieves, 5 for ye are all
sons of light, and sons of day: we are not of night, nor of darkness; 6 so then
let us not sleep, as the rest, but let us watch and be sober. 7 For who sleep
sleep at night; and who are drunken are drunken at night. 8 But let us, since
we are of the day, be sober, putting on a breastplate of faith and love; and
for a helmet, salvation’s hope. 9 For :God appointed us not unto wrath, but
unto the obtaining of salvation through our :Lord Jesus Christ, 10 who died
for us, that, whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with him.
11 Wherefore exhort one another, and build each other up, even as also ye
do.
12 But we ask you, brethren, to know them that labor among you, and
are over you in the Lord, and admonish you; 13 and to esteem them
exceeding highly in love for their :work. Be at peace among yourselves.
14 And we exhort you, brethren, admonish the disorderly, encourage the
fainthearted, support the weak, be longsuffering toward all. 15 See that
none render unto anyone evil for evil; but always follow after what is good,
one toward another, and toward all. 16 Rejoice always; 17 pray without
ceasing; 18 in everything give thanks: for this is God’s will in Christ Jesus
toward you. 19 Quench not the Spirit; 20 despise not prophesyings; 21 but
prove all things; hold fast what is good; 22 abstain from every form of evil.
23 And the God of :peace himself sanctify you wholly; and may your :spirit
and :soul and :body be preserved entire, without blame at the presence of
our :Lord Jesus Christ. 24 Faithful he that calleth you, who will also do it.
25 Brethren, pray for us also.
26 Salute all the brethren with a holy kiss. 27 I adjure you by the Lord
that the letter be read to all the brethren.
28 The grace of our :Lord Jesus Christ be with you.\

UNTO THE THESSALONIANS II

Chapter 1
1 PAUL, and Silvanus, and Timothy, to the church of Thessalonians in God
our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ; 2 Grace to you and peace from God
the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
3 We ought to thank :God always for you, brethren, even as it is meet,
because your :faith groweth exceedingly, and the love of each of you all
toward one another aboundeth; 4 so that we ourselves glory in you in the
churches of :God for your :patience and faith in all your :persecutions and
the afflictions which ye endure: 5 a manifestation of the righteous judgment
of :God; that ye be counted worthy of the kingdom of :God, for which ye also
suffer: 6 if so that it is righteous with God to recompense affliction to those
afflicting you, 7 and to you that are afflicted rest with us, at the revelation of
the Lord Jesus from heaven with angels of his power in flaming fire,
8 rendering vengeance to them that know not God, and to them that obey
not the gospel of our :Lord Jesus: 9 who shall suffer punishment, eternal
destruction from the Lord’s face and from the glory of his :might, 10 when he
shall come to be glorified in his :saints, and to be marvelled at in all that
believed (because our :testimony unto you was believed) in that :day. 11 To
which end also we pray always for you, that our :God count you worthy of
the calling, and fulfill every good pleasure of goodness and work of faith,
with power; 12 that the name of our :Lord Jesus be glorified in you, and ye in
him, according to the grace of our :God and the Lord Jesus Christ.

Chapter 2
1 Now we ask you, brethren, as to the presence of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and our gathering together unto him; 2 that ye be not quickly shaken
from your :mind, nor be troubled, either by spirit, or by word, or by epistle as
from us, as that the day of the Lord is on; 3 let no one beguile you in any
wise: for not unless the falling away come first, and the man of lawlessness
be revealed, the son of :destruction, 4 he that opposeth and exalteth himself
against every one called God or an object of worship; so that he sitteth in
the temple of :God, setting himself forth as being God. 5 Remember ye not,
that, when I was yet with you, I told you these things? 6 And now ye know
what restraineth, so that he be revealed in his own :season. 7 For the
mystery of :lawlessness doth already work: only there is :one that
restraineth now, until he become out of the midst. 8 And then shall be
revealed the lawless one, whom the Lord Jesus shall slay with the spirit of
his :mouth, and bring to nought by the manifestation of his :presence: 9 him
whose :presence is according to Satan’s working with all power and signs
and wonders of falsehood, 10 and with all deceit of unrighteousness for the
perishing; in that they received not the love of the truth, that they be saved.
11 And for this cause :God sendeth them a working of error, that they should
believe the lie: 12 that they all might be judged who believed not the truth,
but had pleasure in :unrighteousness.
13 But WE are bound to thank :God always for you, brethren beloved
of the Lord, because :God chose you from the beginning unto salvation in
sanctification of the Spirit and by belief of the truth: 14 whereunto he called
you through our :gospel, to the obtaining of our Lord Jesus Christ’s glory.
15 So then, brethren, stand fast, and hold the traditions which ye were
taught, whether by word, or by letter of ours. 16 Now our :Lord Jesus Christ
himself, and God our :Father who loved us and gave eternal comfort and
good hope in grace, 17 comfort your :hearts and establish in every good
work and word.

Chapter 3
1 For the rest, brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord run and
be glorified, even as also it is unto you; 2 and that we be delivered from the
unreasonable and evil men; for all have not the faith. 3 But the Lord is
faithful, who shall establish you, and guard from the evil one. 4 And we
have confidence in the Lord as to you, that ye both do and will do what
things we command. 5 And the Lord direct your :hearts unto the love
of :God, and unto the patience of the Christ.
6 Now we command you, brethren, in the Lord Jesus Christ’s name,
that ye withdraw from every brother that walketh disorderly, and not after
the tradition which ye received of us. 7 For yourselves know how ye ought
to imitate us: for we were not disorderly among you; 8 neither did we eat
bread for nought at any one’s hand, but in toil and travail, working night and
day, that we might not burden any of you: 9 not because we have not
authority, but to make ourselves an example to you, that ye imitate us.
10 For even when we were with you, this we commanded you that, If any will
not work, neither let him eat. 11 For we hear that some walk among you
disorderly, that work not at all, but are busybodies. 12 Now the such we
command and exhort in the Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietness they work,
and eat their own :bread. 13 But ye, brethren, be not weary in well-doing.
14 And if any obeyeth not our :word by this :letter, note that one, that ye
have no company with him, so that he be ashamed. 15 And count him not
as an enemy, but admonish as a brother. 16 Now the Lord of :peace himself
give you :peace at all times in every way. The Lord be with you all.
17 The greeting of me Paul with my hand, which is a token in every
epistle: so I write. 18 The grace of our :Lord Jesus Christ be with you all.

UNTO THE HEBREWS

Chapter 1
1 :GOD, having spoken of old to the fathers in the prophets by diverse
portions and in diverse manners, 2 hath at the end of these :days spoken to
us in a Son, whom he appointed heir of all, through whom also he made the
ages; 3 who being the Glory’s effulgence, and the very image of
his :substance, and upholding :all things by the word of his :power, when he
had made purification of :sins, sat down on the right of the Majesty on high;
4 having become by so much better than the angels, as he hath inherited a
more superior name than they. 5 For to which of the angels did he ever
say,
Thou art my Son,
I today have begotten thee?
and again,
I will be to him a Father,
And he shall be to me a Son?
6 And when again he bringeth in the firstborn into the inhabited earth he
saith, And let all angels of God worship him. 7 And of the angels he saith,
Who maketh his :angels spirits,
And his :ministers a flame of fire:
8 but of the Son,
Thy :throne, O :God, is unto the age of the age;
And the sceptre of uprightness is sceptre of his kingdom.
9 Thou hast loved righteousness, and hated lawlessness;
Therefore :God, thy :God, hath anointed thee
With oil of gladness above thy :fellows.
10 And,
Thou, Lord, in the beginnings didst found the earth,
And the heavens are works of thy :hands:
11 They shall perish; (but thou continuest:)
And shall all wax old as a garment;
12 And as a mantle shalt thou roll them up,
As if a garment, and they shall be changed:
But thou art the same,
And thy :years shall not fail.
13 But of which of the angels hath he ever said,
Sit on my right hand,
Till I make thine :enemies footstool of thy :feet?
14 Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth unto service for them that
shall inherit salvation?

Chapter 2
1 Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things heard, lest
haply we drift away. 2 For if the word spoken through angels became firm
and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of
reward; 3 how shall WE escape, if we neglect so great a salvation? which
having at first been spoken through the Lord, was confirmed unto us by
them that heard; 4 :God bearing witness with them, both by signs and
wonders, and manifold powers, and distributions of the Holy Spirit,
according to his :will.
5 For not to angels did he subject the inhabited earth to come,
whereof we speak. 6 But one hath somewhere testified, saying,
What is man, that thou rememberest him?
Or the son of man, that thou visitest him?
7 Thou madest him a little lower than angels;
Thou crownedst him with glory and honor,
And didst set him over the works of thy :hands:
8 Thou didst subject all things under his :feet.
For in that he subjected :all things to him, he left nothing not subject to him.
But now we see not yet all things subjected to him. 9 But we behold him
who hath been made a little lower than angels, Jesus, because of the
suffering of :death crowned with glory and honor, that by God’s grace he
should taste of death for every one. 10 For it became him, for whom are :all
things, and through whom are :all things, in bringing many sons unto glory,
to perfect the author of their :salvation through sufferings. 11 For both the
sanctifier and sanctified are all of one: for which cause he is not ashamed to
call them brethren, 12 saying,
I will declare thy :name to my :brethren,
In midst of the church will I sing thy praise.
13 And again, I will be trusting in him. And again, Lo, I and the little children
whom :God hath given me. 14 Since then the little children are sharers in
blood and flesh, himself also in like manner partook of the same; that
through :death he might bring to nought him that had the power of :death,
that is, the devil; 15 and might deliver all these who from fear of death were
all their :lifetime subject to bondage. 16 For verily not to angels doth he give
help, but he giveth help to the seed of Abraham. 17 Whence it behooved
him in all things to be made like his brethren, that he might become a
merciful and faithful high priest in the things pertaining to :God, to make
propitiation for the sins of the people. 18 For wherein himself hath suffered
being tempted, he is able to help those being tempted.

Chapter 3
1 Whence, holy brethren, partakers of a heavenly calling, consider
the Apostle and High Priest of our :confession, Jesus; 2 who was faithful to
him that appointed him, as also was Moses in all his :house. 3 For he hath
been counted worthy of more glory than Moses, by so much as he that built
the house hath more honor than the house. 4 For every house is built by
some one; but who built all things is God. 5 And Moses indeed was faithful
in all his :house as a servant, for a testimony of those things which were to
be spoken; 6 but Christ as a son, over his :house; whose house are we, if
we hold fast the boldness and the glorying of the hope firm unto the end.
7 Wherefore, even as the Holy :Spirit saith,
Today if ye shall hear his :voice,
8 Harden not your :hearts, as in the provocation,
Like as the day of the trial in the wilderness,
9 Where your :fathers tried me by proving me,
And saw my :works forty years,
10 Wherefore I was displeased with this :generation,
And said, They always err at heart:
But THEY did not know my :ways;
11 As I sware in my :wrath,
If they shall enter into my :rest.
12 Look, brethren, lest haply an evil heart of unbelief shall be in any one of
you, in :falling away from a living God: 13 but exhort one another each day,
so long as it is called Today; lest any one of you be hardened by
deceitfulness of :sin: 14 for we are become partakers of the Christ, if indeed
we hold fast the beginning of the confidence firm unto the end: 15 while it is
said,
Today if ye shall hear his :voice,
Harden not your :hearts, as in the provocation.
16 For who, when they heard, did provoke? nay, not all that came out of
Egypt by Moses? 17 And with whom was he displeased forty years? not
with them that sinned, whose bodies fell in the wilderness? 18 And to whom
sware he that they should not enter into his :rest, but to the disobedient?
19 And we see that they could not enter because of unbelief.

Chapter 4
1 Let us fear therefore, lest haply, a promise being left of entering into
his :rest, any one of you should seem to have come short. 2 For indeed we
have been evangelized even as also they: but the word of :hearing did not
profit them, because they were not united by :faith with them that heard.
3 For we who have believed are entering into the rest; even as he hath said,
As I sware in my :wrath,
If they shall enter into my :rest:
although the works were finished from the world’s foundation. 4 For he hath
said somewhere of the seventh thus, And :God rested on the seventh :day
from all his :works; 5 and in this place again,
They shall not enter into my :rest.
6 Since therefore it remaineth that some enter thereinto, and the afore
evangelized entered not because of disobedience, 7 he again defineth a
certain day, Today, saying in David so long a time after (even as hath been
said before),
Today if ye shall hear his :voice,
Harden not your :hearts.
8 For if Joshua had given them rest, he would not have spoken afterward of
another day. 9 A sabbath rest remaineth therefore for the people of :God.
10 For who is entered into :his rest hath himself also rested from his :work,
as :God did from his :own. 11 Let us therefore give diligence to enter into
that :rest, that no one fall after the same example of :disobedience. 12 For
living is the word of :God, and active, and sharper than any two-edged
sword, and piercing even to the dividing of soul and spirit, of both joints and
marrow, and a discerner of thoughts and intents of the heart. 13 And there
is no creature not manifest in his sight: but all things are naked and laid
open before the eyes of him with whom we have to do.
14 Having therefore a great high priest, who hath passed
through the heavens, Jesus the Son of :God, let us hold fast the confession.
15 For we have not a high priest that cannot sympathize with our :infirmities;
but one in all points tempted according to our likeness, without sin. 16 Let
us therefore with boldness approach the throne of :grace, that we may
receive mercy and find grace to help in time of need.

Chapter 5
1 For every high priest, being taken from men, is appointed for men
in things :pertaining to :God, that he offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins:
2 who can bear gently with the ignorant and erring, since himself also is
compassed with infirmity; 3 and by it is bound, as for the people, so also for
himself, to offer for sins. 4 And no one taketh the honor unto himself, but
when called of :God, even as also was Aaron. 5 So :Christ also glorified not
himself to become high priest, but who spake unto him,
Thou art my Son,
I today have begotten thee:
6 as he saith also in another place,
Thou art priest unto the age
After the order of Melchizedek.
7 Who in the days of his :flesh, having offered up prayers and supplications
with strong crying and tears unto the one who could save him from death,
and having been heard for his :godly fear, 8 though he was a Son, yet
learned :obedience by what he suffered; 9 and, perfected, he became unto
all that obey him the cause of eternal salvation; 10 named of :God high
priest after the order of Melchizedek.
11 Of whom we have many things to say, and hard of interpretation,
since ye are become dull of :hearing. 12 For when by reason of the time ye
ought to be teachers, ye have need again that some one teach you the
rudiments of the beginning of the oracles of :God; and are become such as
need milk, not solid food. 13 For every one that partaketh of milk is
inexperienced in the word of righteousness; for he is a babe. 14 But the
solid food is for perfect men, who by reason of :use have their senses
exercised to discern both good and evil.

Chapter 6
1 Wherefore leaving the word of the beginning of the Christ, let us be borne
on unto the perfection; not laying again a foundation of repentance from
dead works, and of faith toward God,—2 the teaching of baptisms, and of
laying on of hands, and of resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment.
3 And this will we do, if only :God permit. 4 For as to those who were once
enlightened and tasted of the heavenly :gift, and became partakers of the
Holy Spirit, 5 and tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the age to
come, 6 and fell away, it is impossible to renew them again unto repentance;
they crucifying again to themselves and openly shaming the Son of :God.
7 For land which drinketh the rain that cometh oft upon it, and bringeth forth
herbs meet for them for whose sake it is also tilled, receiveth blessing
from :God: 8 but if it beareth thorns and thistles, it is disapproved and nigh a
curse; whose :end is to be burned. 9 But of you, beloved, we are
persuaded :better things and having salvation, even if we thus speak: 10
for :God is not unrighteous to forget your :work and the love which ye
showed toward his :name, in that ye ministered unto the saints, and do
minister. 11 And we desire that each of you show the same diligence unto
the fulness of the hope even to the end: 12 that ye be not sluggish, but
imitators of them who through faith and patience inherit the promises.
13 For when :God made promise to :Abraham, since he had none
greater to swear by, he sware by himself, 14 saying, Surely blessing I will
bless thee, and multiplying I will multiply thee. 15 And thus, having patiently
endured, he obtained the promise. 16 For men swear by the greater: and in
every dispute of theirs the oath is final for confirmation. 17 Wherein :God,
intending to show more abundantly to the heirs of the promise the
immutability of his :counsel, mediated with an oath; 18 that by two
immutable things, in which it is impossible for God to lie, we may have
strong encouragement, who have fled for refuge to lay hold of the hope set
before us: 19 which we have as the soul’s anchor, a hope both sure and firm
and entering into what is within the veil; 20 whither as forerunner Jesus
entered for us, having become a high priest unto the age after the order of
Melchizedek.

Chapter 7
1 For this :Melchizedek, king of Salēm, priest of the Most High :God,
who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings and blessed him,
2 to whom also Abraham divided a tenth of all (being first, by interpretation,
King of righteousness, and then also King of Salem, which is, King of peace;
3 fatherless, motherless, pedigreeless, having neither beginning of days nor
end of life, but made like the Son of :God), abideth a priest :continually.
4 Now consider how great this man was to whom Abraham the patriarch
gave a tenth out of the chief spoils. 5 And they indeed of the sons of Levi
that receive the priest’s office have commandment to take tithes of the
people according to the law, that is, of their :brethren, though these have
come out of the loin of Abraham: 6 but he whose genealogy is not counted
from them hath tithed Abraham, and hath blessed him that hath the
promises. 7 But without any dispute the less is blessed of the better. 8 And
here men that die receive tithes; but there one, of whom it is witnessed that
he liveth. 9 And, so to speak, through Abraham Levi also, who receiveth
tithes, hath paid tithes; 10 for he was yet in the loin of his :father, when
Melchizedek met him. 11 Now, therefore, if perfection was through the
Levitical priesthood (for under it hath the people received the law), what
further need that another priest arise after the order of Melchizedek, and not
be reckoned after the order of Aaron? 12 For the priesthood being changed,
of necessity a change is made also of the law. 13 For he of whom these
things are said hath partaken of another tribe, from which no one hath given
attendance at the altar. 14 For it is evident that our :Lord hath sprung out of
Judah; as to which tribe Moses spake nothing concerning priests. 15 And
this is yet more abundantly evident, if after the likeness of Melchizedek
another priest ariseth, 16 who hath been made, not after a law of carnal
commandment, but after the power of a life indissoluble: 17 for it is
witnessed, [that]
Thou art priest unto the age
After the order of Melchizedek.
18 For there is a disannulling of a foregoing commandment because of
its :weakness and unprofitableness 19 (for the law made nothing perfect),
and a bringing in thereupon of a better hope, through which we draw nigh
to :God. 20 And inasmuch as it is not without an oath 21 (for they indeed
have become priests without an oath; but he with an oath through him that
saith unto him,
The Lord sware and will not repent himself,
Thou art a priest unto the age;)
22 by so much also hath Jesus become surety of a better covenant. 23 And
they indeed have become priests more in number, because that by :death
they are hindered from continuing on: 24 but he, because he continueth unto
the age, hath his :priesthood unchangeable. 25 Whence also he is able to
save to the uttermost them that approach :God through him, he ever living
to make intercession for them. 26 For such a high priest also became
us, holy, guileless, undefiled, separated from :sinners, and become higher
than the heavens; 27 who hath no need daily, like those high priests, to offer
up sacrifices, first for his own :sins, and then for those of the people: for this
he did once for all, when he offered up himself. 28 For the law appointeth as
high priests men having infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was after
the law, appointeth a Son, perfected unto the age.

Chapter 8
1 Now in the things we are saying the chief point is: We have such a
high priest, who sat down on the right of the throne of the Majesty in the
heavens, 2 a minister of the holies, and of the true :tabernacle, which the
Lord pitched, not man. 3 For every high priest is appointed to offer both gifts
and sacrifices: whence it is necessary that this one also have aught to offer.
4 Now if he were on earth, he would not be a priest at all, seeing there are
those who offer the gifts according to law 5 (the which serve a copy and
shadow of the heavenlies, even as Moses when about to complete the
tabernacle is warned: for, See, saith he, thou make all things according to
the pattern :shown thee in the mount). 6 But now hath he obtained a
ministry the more superior, by so much as he is also mediator of a better
covenant, which hath been enacted upon better promises. 7 For if that :first
had been faultless, then would no place have been sought for a second.
8 For blaming them he saith,
Lo, days come, saith the Lord,
That I will accomplish a new covenant over the house of Israel and
over the house of Judah;
9 Not according to the covenant that I made for their :fathers
In the day that I took them by their :hands to lead them forth out of
Egypt land:
For they continued not in my :covenant,
And I regarded them not, saith the Lord.
10 For this is the covenant that I will covenant for the house of Israel
After those :days, saith the Lord;
I will put my laws into their :mind,
And on their heart also will I write them:
And I will be God to them,
And they shall be a people to me:
11 And they shall each in no wise teach his :fellowcitizen,
And each his :brother, saying, Know the Lord:
For all shall know me,
From the least to the greatest of them,
12 Because I will be merciful to their :iniquities,
And their :sins will I remember no more.
13 In that he saith, A new, he hath made old the first. But what becometh old,
yea aged, is nigh vanishing away.

Chapter 9
1 Now even the first had ordinances of service, and its
worldly :sanctuary. 2 For a tabernacle was prepared, the first, wherein are
the candlestick, and the table, and the showbread; which is called the
Holies. 3 And after the second veil, the tabernacle called Holies of holies;
4 having a golden altar of incense, and the ark of the covenant overlaid
everywhere with gold, wherein is a golden pot holding the manna, and the
rod of Aaron that budded, and the tables of the covenant; 5 and above it
cherubim of glory overshadowing the mercy-seat; of which things one
cannot now speak severally. 6 Now these having been thus prepared, the
priests go in continually into the first tabernacle, accomplishing the services;
7 but into the second the high priest alone, once in the year, not without
blood, which he offereth for himself, and for the ignorances of the people: 8
the Holy :Spirit this signifying, that the way into the holy place hath not yet
been made manifest, while the first tabernacle is yet standing; 9 which is a
parable for the present :season; according to which are offered both gifts
and sacrifices that cannot, as to conscience, perfect the worshipper;
10 being only (with meats and drinks and diverse baptisms) carnal
ordinances, imposed until a season of reformation. 11 But Christ having
come a high priest of the good things that are come, through the greater and
more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that is, not of this :creation,
12 nor yet through blood of goats and calves, but through his own :blood,
entered once for all into the holies, having obtained eternal redemption.
13 For if the blood of goats and bulls, and ashes of a heifer sprinkling the
defiled, sanctify unto the cleanness of the flesh: 14 how much more shall the
blood of the Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without
blemish to :God, cleanse our conscience from dead works to serve a living
God? 15 And for this cause he is mediator of a new covenant, so that a
death having taken place for redemption of the transgressions :under the
first covenant, the called may receive the promise of the eternal inheritance.
16 For where a testament is, there must of necessity be the death of him that
made it. 17 For a testament is of force over the dead: for it doth not then
avail when he that made it liveth. 18 Hence even the first covenant hath not
been dedicated without blood. 19 For when every commandment had been
spoken by Moses to the whole people according to the law, he took the
blood of the calves and the goats, with water and scarlet wool and hyssop,
and sprinkled both the book itself and the whole people, 20 saying, This is
the blood of the covenant which :God commanded toward you.
21 Moreover the tabernacle and all the vessels of the ministry he sprinkled
likewise with the blood. 22 And according to the law, almost all things are
cleansed with blood, and apart from shedding of blood is no remission.
23 It was necessary therefore that the copies of the things in the heavens be
cleansed with these; but the heavenlies themselves with better sacrifices
than these. 24 For Christ entered not into holies made with hands, antitypes
of the true; but into the very heaven, now to appear before the face of :God
for us; 25 nor yet that he offer himself oft, as the high priest entereth into the
holies yearly with blood not his own; 26 else must he oft have suffered since
the world’s foundation: but now once at the consummation of the ages hath
he been manifested to put away :sin by the sacrifice of himself. 27 And
inasmuch as it is laid up for :men once to die, and after this—judgment;
28 thus also the Christ, having been once offered to :bear sins of many, shall
appear a second time, without sin, to them that wait for him, unto salvation.

Chapter 10
1 For the law having a shadow of the good things to come, not the
very image of the things, they can never with the same sacrifices year by
year, which they offer continually, make perfect them that draw nigh. 2 Else
would they not have ceased to be offered, because the worshipper having
been once cleansed, would have had no more consciousness of sins?
3 But in these sacrifices remembrance is made of sins year by year. 4 For it
is impossible for blood of bulls and goats to take away sins. 5 Wherefore
when he cometh into the world, he saith,
Sacrifice and offering thou wouldst not,
But a body didst thou prepare me;
6 In whole burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin thou hadst no
pleasure:
7 Then said I, Lo, I am come
(In the roll of the book it is written of me)
:To do thy :will, O :God.
8 Saying above [that], Sacrifices and offerings and whole burnt offerings
and sacrifices for sin thou wouldst not, neither hadst pleasure therein (the
which are offered according to the law), 9 then hath he said, Lo, I am come
to do thy :will. He taketh away the first, that he may establish the second.
10 By which will we have been sanctified through the offering of the body of
Jesus Christ once for all. 11 And every priest indeed standeth daily
ministering and offering oft the same sacrifices, the which can never take
away sins: 12 but this one, when he had offered one sacrifice for sins for
ever, sat down at God’s right: 13 henceforth expecting till his :enemies be
made footstool of his :feet. 14 For by one offering he hath perfected for ever
those being sanctified. 15 And the Holy :Spirit also beareth witness to us;
for after :he hath said,
16 This is the covenant that I will make with them
After those :days, saith the Lord:
I will put my laws on their heart,
Upon their :mind also will I write them;
then,
17 And their :sins and their :iniquities will I remember no more.
18 Now where remission of these is, there is no more offering for sin.
19 Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the holies by the
blood of Jesus, 20 by a new and living way, which he dedicated for us,
through the veil, that is, his :flesh; 21 and having a great priest over the
house of :God; 22 let us approach with a true heart in full assurance of faith,
having our :hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience: and having our :body
washed with pure water, 23 let us hold fast the unwavering confession of the
hope, for faithful he that promised: 24 and let us consider one another unto
provoking of love and good works; 25 not forsaking the assembling of
ourselves together, as is a custom of some, but exhorting; and so much the
more, as ye see the day drawing nigh. 26 For if we sin willfully after we
have received the knowledge of the truth, no more sacrifice remaineth for
sins, 27 but a certain fearful expectation of judgment, and a fierceness of fire
which shall devour the adversaries. 28 One that hath set at nought Moses’
law dieth without compassion on the word of two or three witnesses: 29 of
how much sorer punishment, think ye, shall he be judged worthy, who hath
trodden under the Son of :God, and hath counted the blood of the covenant
wherewith he was sanctified common, and hath insulted the Spirit of :grace?
30 For we know him that said, Vengeance is mine, I will recompense. And
again, The Lord shall judge his :people. 31 Fearful ‘tis to fall into the living
God’s hands. 32 But call to remembrance the former days, in which,
after ye were enlightened, ye endured a great conflict of sufferings; 33 partly,
being made a gazingstock both by reproaches and afflictions; and partly,
becoming partakers with them that were so used. 34 For ye both
sympathized with those in bonds, and took joyfully the spoiling of
your :possessions, knowing that ye have yourselves for a possession better
and abiding. 35 Cast not away therefore your :boldness, which hath great
recompense of reward. 36 For ye have need of patience, that, having done
the will of :God, ye may receive the promise.
37 For yet a very, very little while,
Who cometh shall come, and shall not tarry.
38 But my righteous one shall live from faith:
And if he shrink back, my :soul hath no pleasure in him.
39 But we are not of them that shrink back unto destruction; but of
those having faith unto saving of the soul.

Chapter 11
1 Now faith is assurance of things hoped for, conviction of things
unseen. 2 For therein the elders had witness borne them. 3 By faith we
understand that the ages have been framed by God’s word, so that what is
seen hath not been made out of things which appear. 4 By faith Abel
offered unto :God a sacrifice superior to Cain’s, through which he had
witness borne him that he was righteous, :God bearing witness over
his :gifts: and through it he being dead yet speaketh. 5 By faith Enoch was
translated that he should not see death; and he was not found,
because :God translated him; for he hath had witness borne him before the
translation that he had been well-pleasing to :God: 6 and without faith it is
impossible to be well-pleasing; for who cometh to :God must believe that he
is, and is rewarder of them that seek after him. 7 By faith Noah, warned
concerning the things not seen as yet, with godly fear prepared an ark to the
saving of his :house; through which he condemned the world, and became
heir of the righteousness which is according to faith. 8 By faith Abraham,
when called, obeyed to go out unto a place which he was to receive for
inheritance, and went out, not knowing whither he was going. 9 By faith he
became sojourner in the land of :promise, as in a foreign one, dwelling in
tents, with Isaac and Jacob, the fellow-heirs of the same :promise: 10 for he
awaited the city which hath the foundations, whose builder and maker
is :God. 11 By faith Sarah herself received power to conceive seed, even
when past her season, since she counted him faithful who had promised:
12 wherefore also there were begotten of one, and him as good as dead,
even as the stars of :heaven in :multitude, and as the sand, which is by the
shore of the sea, :innumerable. 13 These all died according to faith, not
having received the promises, but having seen them and greeted from afar,
and having confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth.
14 For who say such things manifest that they are seeking after a country of
their own. 15 And if indeed they had minded that from which they went out,
they would have had opportunity to return. 16 But now they desire a better,
that is, a heavenly: wherefore :God is not ashamed of them, to be called
their God; for he hath prepared them a city. 17 By faith Abraham, being
tried, hath offered up :Isaac, and who had gladly received the promises was
offering up his only begotten son; 18 he unto whom it was said [that], In
Isaac shall thy seed be called: 19 accounting that God is able to raise up,
even the dead; from whence he did also in a parable receive him back.
20 By faith Isaac blessed :Jacob and :Esau, even concerning things to come.
21 By faith Jacob dying blessed each of the sons of Joseph; and worshipped,
leaning upon the top of his :staff. 22 By faith Joseph, at his end, made
mention of the departure of the sons of Israel; and gave commandment
concerning his :bones. 23 By faith Moses, when born, was hid three months
by his :fathers, because they saw the child was goodly; and they were not
afraid of the commandment of the king. 24 By faith Moses, when grown up,
refused to be called son of Pharaoh’s daughter; 25 choosing rather to share
ill treatment with the people of :God, than to enjoy the pleasure of sin for a
season; 26 accounting the reproach of the Christ greater riches than the
treasures of Egypt: for he looked unto the recompense of reward. 27 By
faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king: for he endured, as
seeing him who is invisible. 28 By faith he instituted the passover, and the
sprinkling of the blood, that the destroyer of the firstborn should not touch
them. 29 By faith they passed through the Red Sea as by dry land: which
the Egyptians attempting to do were swallowed up. 30 By faith the walls of
Jericho fell down, surrounded for seven days. 31 By faith Raab the harlot
perished not with the disobedient, having received the spies with peace.
32 And what more shall I say? for the time will fail me if I tell of Gideōn,
Barak, Sampsōn, Jephthæ; and of David and Samuel and the prophets:
33 who through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained
promises, stopped lions’ mouths, 34 quenched fire’s power, escaped the
sword’s edge, from weakness were made strong, waxed mighty in war,
turned to flight armies of aliens. 35 Women received their :dead by
resurrection: and others were tortured, not accepting their deliverance, that
they might obtain a better resurrection: 36 And others had trial of mockings
and scourgings, yea, moreover of bonds and imprisonment: 37 they were
stoned, were tempted, sawn asunder, died by the sword’s slaughter: went
about in sheepskins, in goatskins; destitute, afflicted, ill-treated 38 (of whom
the world was not worthy), wandering in deserts and mountains and caves,
and the holes of the earth. 39 And these all, witnessed to through their
faith, received not the promise, 40 :God having foreseen something better
concerning us, that apart from us they be not made perfect.

Chapter 12
1 Therefore now we also, having so great a cloud of witnesses
encompassing us, let us lay aside every weight, and the easily besetting sin,
and let us run with patience the race set before us, 2 looking unto Jesus the
author and perfecter of the faith, who for the joy set before him endured a
cross, despising shame, and hath sat down at the right of the throne of :God.
3 For consider him that hath endured such gainsaying of :sinners against
himself that ye weary not, fainting in your :souls. 4 Ye have not yet resisted
unto blood, striving against :sin: 5 and have forgotten the exhortation which
reasoneth with you as with sons,
My son, regard not lightly the Lord’s chastening,
Nor faint when reproved of him;
6 For whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth,
And scourgeth every son whom he receiveth.
7 It is for chastening that ye endure; :God dealeth with you as with sons; for
what son is there whom a father chasteneth not? 8 But if ye are without
chastening, whereof all have been made partakers, then are ye bastards,
and not sons. 9 Furthermore, we had the fathers of our :flesh as chasteners,
and we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be subject to the
Father of the spirits, and live? 10 For they indeed for a few days chastened
us as seemed good to them; but he for :profit, that we may be partakers of
his holiness. 11 Now all chastening seemeth for the present to be not
joyous but grievous; yet afterward yieldeth to those exercised thereby
peaceable fruit of righteousness. 12 Wherefore straighten the hanging
down hands, and the paralysed knees; 13 and make straight paths for
your :feet, that what is lame be not turned out of the way, but rather be
healed. 14 Follow after peace with all, and the sanctification without
which no one shall see the Lord: 15 looking carefully lest there be any that
falleth short of the grace of :God; lest any root of bitterness springing up
trouble you, and thereby the many be defiled; 16 lest there be any fornicator,
or profane person, as Esau, who for one piece of food sold his
own :birthrights. 17 For ye know that even when he afterward desired to
inherit the blessing, he was disapproved; for he found no place for
repentance in his father, though he sought it diligently with tears. 18 For
ye are not come to a mount that might be touched, and that burned with fire,
and to blackness, and darkness, and tempest, 19 and sound of a trumpet,
and voice of words; which voice they that heard entreated that no word be
added for them; 20 for they could not endure what was enjoined, If even a
beast touch the mountain, it shall be stoned; 21 and so fearful was the
appearance, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear and quake: 22 but ye are
come unto mount Zion, and unto the city of the living God, heavenly
Jerusalem, and to myriads of angels, 23 a general assembly and church of
firstborn enrolled in the heavens, and to God, Judge of all, and to spirits of
perfected just men, 24 and to Jesus, mediator of a new covenant, and to
blood of sprinkling that speaketh better than :Abel. 25 See ye refuse not him
that speaketh. For if THEY escaped not when they refused him that warned
on earth, much less we who turn away from him that is from the heavens:
26 whose :voice then shook the earth: but now he hath promised, saying,
Yet once more will I make to tremble not the earth only, but also the heaven.
27 And this, Yet once more, signifieth the removing of the things shaken, as
of things made, that those not shaken may remain. 28 Wherefore, receiving
an unshakable kingdom, let us have grace, whereby we may offer service
well-pleasing to :God with godly fear and awe: 29 For our :God is indeed a
consuming fire.

Chapter 13
1 Let brotherly love continue. 2 Forget not the love of strangers: for
thereby some have entertained angels unawares. 3 Remember those in
bonds, as bound with them; the ill-treated as being yourselves also in the
body. 4 Let marriage be in honor among all, and the bed undefiled: for
fornicators and adulterers :God will judge. 5 Let your :turn of mind be
without love of money, content with what things ye have: for himself hath
said, I will in no wise fail thee, neither will I in any wise forsake thee. 6 So
that we boldly say,
The Lord is my helper; I will not fear:
What shall man do to me?
7 Remember those ruling over you, men that spake to you the word
of :God; considering the outcome of their behavior imitate their faith.
8 Jesus Christ the same yesterday and today, and unto the ages. 9 Be not
carried away by diverse and strange teachings: for it is good that the heart
be established by grace; not by meats, wherein they that walked were not
profited. 10 We have an altar, whereof they have no right to eat that serve
the tabernacle. 11 For the bodies of those beasts whose :blood is brought
into the holies through the high priest for sin, are burned without the camp.
12 Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people through his
own :blood, suffered without the gate. 13 Let us therefore go forth unto him
without the camp, bearing his :reproach. 14 For we have not here an
abiding city, but we seek after the one to come. 15 Through him therefore
let us offer up sacrifice of praise to :God continually, that is, the fruit of lips
confessing to his :name. 16 But forget not well-doing and fellowship: for with
such sacrifices :God is well pleased. 17 Obey those ruling over you,
and submit: for THEY watch in behalf of your :souls, as they that shall give
account; that they may do this with joy, and not groaning: for this is
unprofitable for you.
18 Pray for us: for we are persuaded that we have a good conscience,
desiring to behave honorably in all things. 19 And I exhort the more
exceedingly to do this, that I be restored to you the sooner. 20 Now the
God of :peace, who brought again from the dead the great :shepherd of the
sheep in blood of an eternal covenant, our :Lord Jesus, 21 perfect you in
every good to do his :will, to do in us what is well-pleasing in his sight,
through Jesus Christ; to whom the glory unto the ages of the ages. Amen.
22 But I exhort you, brethren, bear with the word of :exhortation: for I have
written you in few words. 23 Know that our :brother Timothy is set free;
with whom, if he come shortly, I will see you.
24 Greet all that are ruling over you, and all the saints. They of :Italy
greet you.
25 The grace be with you all.

UNTO TIMOTHY I

Chapter 1
1 PAUL, apostle of Christ Jesus according to God our Savior’s
commandment, and of Christ Jesus our :hope; 2 to Timothy, genuine child
in faith: Grace, mercy, peace, from God the Father and Christ Jesus
our :Lord.
3 As I, going into Macedonia, exhorted thee to tarry at Ephesus, that
thou charge certain men not to teach otherwise, 4 neither to give heed to
fables and endless genealogies, which minister to questionings, rather than
God’s stewardship which is in faith; so now. 5 But the end of the charge is
love out of a pure heart and good conscience and faith unfeigned: 6 from
which things some having swerved have turned aside unto vain talking;
7 desiring to be teachers of law, though understanding neither what they
say, nor whereof they confidently affirm. 8 But we know that the law is good,
if one use it lawfully, 9 as knowing this, that law is not made for a righteous
man, but for lawless and unruly, for ungodly and sinners, for unholy and
profane, for murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers, for manslayers,
10 for fornicators, abusers of themselves with men, menstealers, liars, false
swearers, and if any other thing be contrary to the sound teaching;
11 according to the gospel of the glory of the blessed God, which was
entrusted to me. 12 I thank him that enabled me, Christ Jesus our :Lord,
that he counted me faithful, appointing me to service; 13 though I
was :before a blasphemer, and persecutor, and injurious: but I obtained
mercy, because I did it ignorantly in unbelief; 14 and the grace of our :Lord
abounded exceedingly with faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.
15 Faithful the saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came
into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief: 16 howbeit for this cause
I obtained mercy, that in me as chief might Jesus Christ show forth all the
longsuffering, for an example of them that should thereafter believe on him
unto eternal life. 17 Now unto the King of the ages, incorruptible, invisible,
only God, honor and glory unto the ages of the ages. Amen.
18 This :charge I commit to thee, Timothy child, according to the prophecies
which led the way to thee, that by them thou war the good warfare;
19 having faith and a good conscience; which some having thrust away
made shipwreck concerning the faith: 20 of whom is Hymenæus and
Alexander; whom I delivered to :Satan, that they be taught not to
blaspheme.

Chapter 2
1 I exhort therefore first of all to make supplications, prayers,
intercessions, thanksgivings, for all men; 2 for kings and all that are in high
place; that we may lead a tranquil and quiet life in all godliness and gravity.
3 This is good and acceptable before God our :Savior; 4 who willeth all men
to be saved and to come to a knowledge of truth. 5 For one is God, one is
also mediator between God and men, a man, Christ Jesus, 6 who gave
himself a ransom for all; the testimony to be in its own seasons; 7 whereunto
I was appointed preacher and apostle (I speak truth, I lie not), a teacher of
the nations in faith and truth. 8 I desire therefore the men to pray in
every place, lifting up holy hands, without wrath and disputings. 9 Likewise,
that women adorn themselves in modest apparel, with shamefastness and
sobriety; not with braids, and gold or pearls or costly raiment; 10 but (which
becometh women professing godliness) through good works. 11 Let a
woman learn in quietness with all subjection. 12 But I permit not a woman to
teach, nor to have dominion over a man, but to be in quietness. 13 For
Adam was first formed, then Eve; 14 and Adam was not deceived, but the
woman being much deceived hath fallen into transgression: 15 but she shall
be saved through the childbearing, if they continue in faith and love and
sanctification with sobriety.

Chapter 3
1 Faithful the saying. If one seeketh an overseership, he
desireth a good work: 2 the overseer therefore must be without reproach,
husband of one wife, temperate, sober-minded, orderly, hospitality-lover,
apt to teach; 3 no brawler, no striker; but gentle, not contentious, no
money-lover; 4 ruling well his own :house, having children in subjection with
all gravity; 5 (but if one knoweth not how to rule his own :house, how shall he
care for God’s church?) 6 not a novice, lest puffed up he fall into
condemnation of the devil. 7 Moreover he must have good testimony from
them without: lest he fall into reproach and the devil’s snare. 8 Deacons
likewise must be grave, not double-tongued, not given to much wine, not
greedy of filthy lucre; 9 holding the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience.
10 And let these also first be proved; then let them serve as deacons, if they
be blameless. 11 Women likewise must be grave, not slanderers,
temperate, faithful in all things.
12 Let deacons be husbands of one wife, ruling the children and their
own :houses well. 13 For who have served well as deacons gain to
themselves a good standing, and great boldness in the faith which is in
Christ Jesus. 14 These things write I to thee, hoping to come unto thee
shortly; 15 but if I delay that thou know how one should behave in God’s
house, the which is the living God’s church, pillar and ground of the truth.
16 And confessedly great is the mystery of :godliness;
Who was manifested in the flesh,
Justified in the spirit,
Seen of angels,
Preached among nations,
Believed on in the world,
Received up in glory.

Chapter 4
1 But the Spirit saith expressly, that in later seasons some shall fall
from the faith, giving heed to deceiving spirits and teachings of demons,
2 through hypocrisy of lying speakers, their own conscience branded;
3 forbidding to marry, commanding to abstain from meats, which :God
created to be received with thanksgiving by them that believe and know the
truth. 4 Because every creature of God is good, and nothing is to be
rejected, if received with thanksgiving: 5 for it is sanctified through God’s
word and prayer. 6 If thou put the brethren in mind of these things, thou
shalt be a good minister of Christ Jesus, nourished in the words of the faith
and of the good teaching which thou hast followed on: 7 but refuse profane
and old women’s fables. And exercise thyself unto godliness: 8 for the
bodily exercise is profitable for little; but :godliness is profitable for all things,
having promise of the life now, and of the one to come. 9 Faithful the saying,
and worthy of all acceptation. 10 For hereunto we labor and strive, because
we have our hope set on a living God, who is Savior of all men, specially of
the faithful.
11 These things command and teach. 12 Let no one despise
thy :youth; but be an example to the faithful, in word, in behavior, in love, in
faith, in purity. 13 Till I come, give heed to the reading, the exhortation, the
teaching. 14 Neglect not the gift in thee, which was given thee through
prophecy, with laying on of the hands of the presbytery. 15 Be diligent in
these; give thyself wholly to these; that thy :progress be manifest to all.
16 Take heed to thyself, and to the teaching. Continue therein; for in doing
this thou shalt save both thyself and thy :hearers.

Chapter 5
1 Rebuke not an elder, but exhort as a father; the younger as
brethren: 2 the elder as mothers; the younger as sisters, in all purity.
3 Honor widows that are widows indeed. 4 But if any widow hath children or
grandchildren, let them learn first to show piety towards their own house,
and to requite their parents: for this is acceptable before :God. 5 Now she
that is a widow indeed and lone, hath her hope set on :God, and continueth
in :supplications and :prayers night and day. 6 But who liveth in
self-indulgence is dead while she liveth. 7 These things also command, that
they be without reproach. 8 But if any provideth not for his :own, and
specially his household, he hath denied the faith, and is worse than an
unbeliever. 9 Let none be enrolled as a widow under threescore years old,
wife of one man, 10 well reported of for good works; if she hath brought up
children, if she was hospitable to strangers, if she hath washed saints’ feet,
if she hath relieved the afflicted, if she hath diligently followed every good
work. 11 But younger widows refuse: for when they have waxed wanton
against the Christ, they desire to marry; 12 having condemnation, because
they have rejected their first faith. 13 And withal they learn also to be idle,
going about houses, and not only idle, but tattlers also and busybodies,
speaking the things they ought not. 14 I desire therefore the younger to
marry, bear children, rule a household, give no occasion to the adversary
for reviling: 15 for already some are turned aside after :Satan. 16 If any
believer hath widows, let her relieve them, and let not the church be
burdened; that it may relieve the real widows. 17 Let the elders ruling
well be counted worthy of double honor, specially those who toil in the word
and teaching. 18 For the scripture saith, Thou shalt not muzzle the ox when
treading out corn. And, The laborer is worthy of his :hire. 19 Against an
elder receive no accusation, except from two or three witnesses. 20 But the
sinning reprove before all, that the rest also be in fear. 21 I charge
before :God, and Christ Jesus, and the elect angels, that thou observe
these things without prejudice, doing nothing by partiality. 22 Lay hands
hastily on no one, neither be partaker of others’ sins: keep thyself pure.
23 No longer drink water, but use a little wine for thy :stomach’s sake and
thine oft :infirmities. 24 The sins of some men are evident, going before unto
judgment; and some also they follow after. 25 Likewise also the
good :works are evident; and such as are otherwise cannot be hid.

Chapter 6
1 Let as many as are bondmen under the yoke count their own
masters worthy of all honor, that the name of :God and the teaching be not
blasphemed. 2 And who have believing masters, let them not despise them,
because they are brethren; but let them serve rather, because they that
partake of the benefit are believing and beloved.
These things teach and exhort. 3 If any teacheth different, and
consenteth not to sound words, those of our :Lord Jesus Christ, and to the
teaching according to godliness, 4 he is puffed up, knowing nothing, but sick
about questionings and disputes of words, whereof cometh envy, strife,
railings, evil surmisings, 5 wranglings of men corrupted in :mind and bereft
of the truth, supposing :godliness is gain. 6 But :godliness with contentment
is great gain: 7 for we brought nothing into the world, because neither can
we carry anything out; 8 but having foods and covering we shall be
therewith content. 9 But who would be rich fall into temptation and a snare
and many foolish and hurtful lusts, such as drown :men unto destruction
and perdition. 10 For the love of money is a root of all :evils; which some
reaching after have been led astray from the faith, and have pierced
themselves through with many sorrows. 11 But thou, O man of God,
flee these; and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience,
meekness. 12 Fight the good fight of the faith, lay hold of the eternal life,
whereunto thou wast called, and didst confess the good confession in sight
of many witnesses. 13 I charge thee in sight of :God, who giveth life to :all
things, and of Jesus Christ, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed the good
confession; 14 that thou keep the commandment, without spot, without
reproach, until the appearing of our :Lord Jesus Christ: 15 which in his own
seasons he, the blessed and only Potentate, shall show, the King of :kings,
and Lord of lords; 16 who alone hath immortality, dwelling in light
unapproachable; whom no man hath seen, nor can see: to whom be honor
and power eternal. Amen. 17 Charge the rich in the present age, not to
be highminded, nor have their hope set on the uncertainty of riches, but on
the God who giveth us richly all things to enjoy; 18 to do good, to be rich in
good works, to be ready to distribute, willing to communicate; 19 treasuring
up for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they
may lay hold on the real life. 20 O Timothy, guard the deposit, turning
away from the profane babblings and oppositions of the knowledge falsely
so called; 21 which some professing have deviated from the faith.
:Grace be with you.

UNTO TIMOTHY II

Chapter 1
1 PAUL, apostle of Christ Jesus through God’s will, according to promise of
the life :in Christ Jesus, 2 to Timothy, beloved child: grace, mercy, peace,
from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ our Lord.
3 I thank :God, whom I serve from my forefathers in a pure
conscience, how unceasing is my :remembrance of thee in
my :supplications night and day 4 longing to see thee, remembering
thy :tears, that I may be filled with joy, 5 having been reminded of the
unfeigned faith in thee; which dwelt first in thy :grandmother Lōis, and
thy :mother Eunicē; and, I am persuaded that in thee also. 6 For which
cause I remind thee to stir into flame the gift of :God, which is in thee
through the laying on of my :hands. 7 For :God gave us not a spirit of
fearfulness; but of power and love and sobering. 8 Be not ashamed
therefore of the testimony of our :Lord, nor of me his :prisoner: but suffer
hardship with the gospel according to God’s power; 9 who saved us, and
called us with a holy calling, not according to our :works, but according to
his own purpose and grace :given us in Christ Jesus before age times,
10 but hath now been manifested through the appearing of our :Savior
Christ Jesus, who nullified :death, and brought life and incorruption to light
through the gospel, 11 whereunto I was appointed preacher, and apostle,
and teacher. 12 For which cause I suffer also these things: yet I am not
ashamed; for I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is
able to guard my :deposit against that :day. 13 Hold a pattern of sound
words which thou hast heard from me, in faith and love which is in Christ
Jesus. 14 The good deposit guard through the Holy Spirit who dwelleth in
us. 15 This thou knowest, that all they in :Asia turned away from me; of
whom is Phygelus and Hermogenēs. 16 The Lord grant mercy to the house
of Onēsiphorus: because he oft refreshed me, and was not ashamed of
my :chain; 17 but, when he was in Rome, he sought me diligently, and found
me 18 (the Lord grant him to find mercy of the Lord in that :day); and in how
many things he ministered at Ephesus, thou knowest quite well.

Chapter 2
1 Thou therefore, my child, be strengthened in the grace that is in
Christ Jesus. 2 And what things thou hast heard from me among many
witnesses, the same commit to faithful men, who shall be able to teach
others also. 3 Suffer hardship with me, as a good soldier of Christ Jesus.
4 No soldier on service entangleth himself in the affairs of :life; so as to
please him who enrolled him as a soldier. 5 And if also one contend in
games, he is not crowned, except he have contended lawfully. 6 The toiling
husbandman must be first to partake of the fruits. 7 Consider what I say; for
the Lord shall give thee understanding in all things. 8 Remember Jesus
Christ, risen from the dead, of David’s seed, according to my :gospel:
9 wherein I suffer hardship unto bonds, as an evil doer; but the word of :God
is not bound. 10 Therefore I endure all things for the elect’s sake, that they
also may obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.
11 Faithful the saying: for if we died together, we shall also live together: 12 if
we endure, we shall also reign together: if we shall deny him, he also shall
deny us; 13 if we are faithless, he abideth faithful; for he cannot deny himself.
14 Of these things remind them, charging before :God not to strive about
words, to no profit, to the subverting of them that hear. 15 Give diligence to
present thyself approved to :God, a workman that needeth not to be
shamed, rightly dividing the word of the truth. 16 But shun the profane
babblings :for they will proceed further in ungodliness, 17 and their word will
eat as a gangrene: of whom is Hymenæus and Philētus 18 who have
deviated from the truth, saying that a resurrection is past already, and
overthrow the faith of some. 19 Howbeit :God’s firm foundation standeth,
having this :seal. The Lord knoweth them that are his: and, Let every one
naming the name of the Lord depart from unrighteousness. 20 Now in a
great house are not only vessels of gold and of silver, but also of wood and
of earth; and some unto honor, and some unto dishonor. 21 If one therefore
purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto honor, sanctified, meet
for the master’s use, prepared unto every good work. 22 But flee the
youthful lusts, and pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace, with all that call
on the Lord out of a pure heart. 23 But the foolish and ignorant questionings
refuse, knowing that they gender strifes. 24 And the Lord’s bondman must
not strive, but be gentle toward all, apt to teach, forbearing, 25 in meekness
correcting the opposers; if haply :God give them repentance unto a
knowledge of the truth, 26 and they may sober up from the snare of the devil,
having been taken captive by him unto that one’s will.

Chapter 3
1 But know this, that in the last days grievous seasons shall come.
2 For :men shall be self-lovers, money-lovers, boastful, haughty, railers,
disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, 3 without natural affection,
implacable, slanderers, without self-control, fierce, no lovers of good,
4 traitors, headstrong, puffed up, pleasure-lovers rather than God-lovers;
5 having a form of godliness, but having denied the power thereof: from
these also turn away. 6 For of these are they that creep into :houses, and
capture small women laden with sins, led by diverse lusts, 7 ever learning,
and never able to come to a knowledge of truth. 8 And in the same manner
as Jannēs and Jambrēs withstood Moses, so these also withstand the truth;
men corrupted in :mind, disapproved concerning the faith. 9 But they shall
proceed no further: for their :folly shall be evident unto all, as :theirs also
came to be.
10But thou didst followmy :teaching, :conduct, :purpose, :faith,
:longsuffering, :love, :patience, 11 :persecutions, :sufferings; such as befell
me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra; such persecutions as I endured: and
out of all the Lord delivered me. 12 Yea, and all that would live godly in
Christ Jesus shall be persecuted. 13 But evil men and impostors shall
wax :worse, deceiving and being deceived. 14 But thou, abide in what
things thou hast learned and hast been assured of, knowing of what
persons thou hast learned; 15 and that from a babe thou hast known the
sacred writings which can make thee wise unto salvation through faith
which is in Christ Jesus. 16 Every scripture is God breathed, and profitable
for teaching, for reproof, for correction, for discipline which is :in
righteousness: 17 that the man of :God be complete, furnished completely
unto every good work.

Chapter 4
1 I charge before God and Christ Jesus, who shall judge the living
and dead, and by his :appearing and his :kingdom: 2 preach the word; be
urgent in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all
longsuffering and teaching. 3 For a season will be when they will not endure
the sound teaching; but, having itching :ears, will heap to themselves
teachers after their own lusts; 4 and will turn away their ears from the truth,
and turn aside unto the fables. 5 But be thou sober in all things, suffer
hardship, do an evangelist’s work, fulfill thy :ministry. 6 For I am already
being offered, and the season of my :departure is come. 7 The good fight I
have fought, the course I have finished, the faith I have kept: 8 For the rest,
the crown of :righteousness is laid up for me, which the Lord, the righteous
judge, shall give to me at that :day; and not to me only, but also to all that
have loved his :appearing.
9 Give diligence to come shortly unto me: 10 for Dēmas forsook me,
having loved the present age, and went to Thessalonica; Crēscēs to Galatia,
Titus to Dalmatia. 11 Only Luke is with me. Take Mark and bring him with
thee; for he is useful to me for ministry. 12 But Tychicus I sent to Ephesus.
13 The cloak that I left at Trōas with Carpus, bring when thou comest, and
the booklets, especially the parchments. 14 Alexander the coppersmith
displayed toward me many evil things: the Lord will render to him according
to his :works: 15 of whom beware THOU also for he greatly withstood
our :words. 16 At my first :defence no one took my part, but all forsook me:
be it not laid to their account. 17 But the Lord stood by me, and
strengthened me; that through me the proclamation might be thoroughly
made, and all the nations might hear: and I was delivered out of the lion’s
mouth. 18 The Lord will deliver me from every evil work, and will save me
unto his heavenly :kingdom: to whom be the glory unto the ages of the ages.
Amen.
19 Greet Prisca and Aquila, and the house of Onēsiphorus.
20 Erastus remained at Corinth: but Trophimus I left at Milētus sick. 21 Give
diligence to come before winter. Eubulus greeteth thee, and Pudēs,
and Linus, and Claudia, and all the brethren.
22 The Lord be with thy :spirit. The grace be with you.

UNTO TITUS

Chapter 1
1 PAUL, God’s bondman, and Jesus Christ’s apostle, according to the faith
of God’s elect and knowledge of truth :according to godliness 2 in hope of
eternal life, which God, who lies not, promised before age-times; 3 but in his
own seasons manifested his :word in a proclamation, wherewith I was
entrusted according to the commandment of :God our Savior; 4 to Titus, my
genuine child after a common faith: Grace and peace from God the Father
and Christ Jesus our :Savior.
5 For this cause left I thee in Crētē, that thou shouldest set in order
the things wanting, and appoint elders in every city, as I gave thee charge;
6 if any is blameless, husband of one wife, having believing children not
accused of riot or unruly. 7 For the overseer must be blameless, as God’s
steward; not self-willed, not soon angry, no brawler, no striker, not greedy of
filthy lucre; 8 but a lover of strangers, lover of good, sober-minded, just, holy,
self-controlled; 9 holding to the faithful word which is according to the
teaching, that he be able both to exhort in the :sound teaching, and to
convict the gainsayers. 10 For many are unruly, vain talkers and
deceivers, specially they of the circumcision, 11 whose mouths must be
stopped; the which overthrow whole houses, teaching things which they
ought not, for filthy lucre’s sake. 12 One of them, a prophet of their own,
said,
Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, idle bellies. 13 This :testimony
is true. For which cause reprove them sharply, that they be sound in the
faith, 14 not giving heed to Jewish fables, and commandments of men who
turn away from the truth. 15 To the pure all things are pure: but to the defiled
and unbelieving nothing is pure; but both their :mind and :conscience are
defiled. 16 They profess to know God; but by their works they deny him,
being abominable, and disobedient, and unto every good work
disapproved.

Chapter 2
1 But speak thou the things which befit the sound teaching: 2 that
aged men be temperate, grave, sober-minded, sound
in :faith, :love, :patience: 3 that aged women likewise be reverent in
demeanor, not slanderers nor enslaved to much wine, teachers of what is
good; 4 that they may train the young to be husband-lovers, child-lovers,
5 sober-minded, chaste, home-workers, good, subject to their own
husbands, that the word of :God be not blasphemed: 6 the younger men
likewise exhort to be sober-minded: 7 in all things showing thyself an
example of good works; in the teaching showing uncorruptness, gravity,
8 sound speech, that cannot be condemned; that he that is of the contrary
part be ashamed, having no evil to say of us. 9 Bondmen to be subject to
their own masters in all things to be well-pleasing, not gainsaying, 10 not
purloining, but showing all good faithfulness; that they may adorn the
teaching of :God our Savior in all things. 11 For the grace of :God hath
appeared to all men bringing salvation, 12 instructing us, that,
denying :ungodliness and worldly :lusts, we should live soberly and
righteously and godly in this present age; 13 awaiting the blessed hope and
appearing of the glory of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ;
14 who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify to himself a people for his possession, zealous of good works.
15 These things speak and exhort and reprove with all authority. Let no one
despise thee.

Chapter 3
1 Remind them to be subject to rulers, to authorities, to be obedient, to be
ready unto every good work, 2 to speak evil of no one, to be not contentious,
to be gentle, showing all meekness toward all men. 3 For we also once
were foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures,
living in malice and envy, hateful, hating one another. 4 But when the
kindness of :God our Savior, and his :love to man, appeared, 5 not
by :works which WE did in righteousness, but according to his :mercy he
saved us, through a washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Spirit,
6 whom he poured out upon us richly, through Jesus Christ our :Savior;
7 that, being justified by his :grace, we might become heirs according to the
hope of eternal life. 8 Faithful the saying, and concerning these I desire that
thou affirm confidently, so that they who have believed God be careful to
maintain good works. These things are good and profitable for :men: 9 but
shun foolish questionings, and genealogies, and strifes, and fightings about
law; for they are unprofitable and vain. 10 A factious man after one
admonition and a second refuse; 11 knowing that the such is perverted, and
sinneth, being self-condemned.
12 When I shall send Artemas unto thee, or Tychicus, give diligence
to come unto me to Nicopolis: for there have I determined to winter. 13 Set
forward Zenas the lawyer and Apollos diligently, that nothing be wanting to
them. 14 And let :our people also learn to maintain good works for the
necessary uses, that they be not unfruitful.
15 All those with me greet thee. Greet them that love us in faith.
The grace be with you all.

UNTO PHILEMON

Chapter 1
1 PAUL, prisoner of Christ Jesus, and Timothy the brother, to Philēmōn the
beloved and our fellow-worker, 2 and to Apphia the sister, and to Archippus
our :fellow-soldier, and to the church in thy house: 3 Grace to you and peace
from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
4 I thank my :God always making mention of thee in my :prayers,
5 hearing of thy :love and the faith which thou hast toward the Lord Jesus,
and toward all the saints; 6 so that the fellowship of thy :faith may become
effectual, in knowledge of every good that is in us, toward Christ Jesus.
7 For much joy I had and comfort over thy :love, because the hearts of the
saints have been refreshed through thee, brother. 8 Wherefore, though
having much boldness in Christ to enjoin thee what is befitting, 9 for :love’s
sake I rather beseech, being such as Paul, an old man and now also
prisoner of Christ Jesus:—10 I beseech thee for my :child, whom I have
begotten in my :bonds, Onēsimus, 11 once :unprofitable to thee, but now
profitable to thee and to me: 12 whom I have sent back to thee himself, that
is, my very :heart, 13 whom I would fain keep with me, that in thy behalf he
minister unto me in the bonds of the gospel: 14 but without thy :mind I
wished to do nothing; that thy :goodness be not as of necessity, but of free
will. 15 For perhaps he was therefore parted from thee for an hour, that thou
shouldest have him for ever; 16 no longer as bondman, but more than
bondman, a brother beloved, specially to me, but how much rather to thee,
both in the flesh and in the Lord. 17 If therefore thou hast me for partner,
receive him as myself. 18 If, therefore, he wronged thee aught or oweth,
charge this to me; 19 I Paul write with my :hand, I will repay: that I tell thee
not that thou owest me besides even thine own self. 20 Yea, brother, let me
have help of thee in the Lord: refresh my :heart in Christ.
21 Trusting thine :obedience I write thee, knowing that thou wilt do
even beyond what I say. 22 But withal prepare me also a lodging: for I hope
that through your :prayers I shall be granted you.
23 My :fellow-prisoner in Christ Jesus Epaphras greeteth thee; 24 so
doth Mark, Aristarchus, Dēmas, Luke, my :fellow-workers.
25 The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your :spirit.

REVELATION OF JOHN

Chapter 1
1 JESUS CHRIST’S revelation which :God gave him to show to his :bondmen
things which must come to pass with speed: and he sent and signified it
through his :angel to his :bondman John; 2 who witnessed to the word
of :God and to the witness of Jesus Christ, all things that he saw. 3 Blessed
who readeth, and who hear the words of the prophecy, and keep the things
written therein: for the season is nigh.
4 JOHN to the seven churches :in :Asia: Grace to you and peace, from him
who is and who was and who is to come; and from the seven Spirits :before
his :throne; 5 and from Jesus Christ, the faithful :witness, the firstborn of the
dead, and the ruler of the kings of the earth. To him that loveth us, and
loosed us from our :sins in his :blood;—6 and he made us a kingdom,
priests to :God and his Father;—to him the glory and the might unto the
ages. Amen. 7 Lo, he cometh with the clouds; and every eye shall see him,
and they that pierced him; and all the tribes of the earth shall mourn over
him. Yea, Amen.
8 I am the Alpha and the Ō, saith the Lord :God, who is and who was
and who is to come, the Almighty.
9 I John, your :brother and partaker with you in the tribulation and
kingdom and patience in Jesus, was in the isle :called Patmos, for the word
of :God and the witness of Jesus. 10 I became in Spirit on the Lord’s day,
and heard behind me a great voice, as of a trump 11 saying, What thou
seest, write in a booklet and send to the seven churches: unto Ephesus,
and unto Smyrna, and unto Pergamos, and unto Thyatira, and unto Sardeis,
and unto Philadelphia, and unto Laodicea. 12 And I turned to see the voice
that spake with me. And having turned I saw seven golden lampstands;
13 and amidst the lampstands one like a son of man, clothed down to the
foot, and girt about at the breasts with a golden girdle. 14 And his :head and
his :hair white as white wool, as snow; and his :eyes as a flame of fire;
15 and his :feet like burnished brass, as refined in a furnace; and his :voice
as the voice of many waters; 16 and having in his :right hand seven stars:
and proceeding out of his :mouth a sharp two-edged sword: and
his :countenance as the sun shineth in his :strength. 17 And when I saw him,
I fell at his :feet as one dead. And he laid his :right hand upon me, saying,
Fear not; I am the first and the last, 18 and the Living one; and I became
dead, and lo, I am alive unto the ages of the ages, and have the keys
of :death and of :Hades. 19 Write therefore what things thou sawest, and
those which are, and those which shall come to pass hereafter; 20 the
mystery of the seven stars which thou sawest in my :right, and the
seven :golden lampstands. The seven stars are angels of the seven
churches: and the seven :lampstands are seven churches.

Chapter 2
1 To the angel :of the church in Ephesus write:
These things saith he who holdeth the seven stars in his :right, who
walketh midst the seven :golden lampstands: 2 I know thy :works, and
thy :toil and :patience, and that thou canst not bear evil men, and didst try
them that call themselves apostles, and they are not, and didst find them
false; 3 and thou hast patience and didst bear for my :name’s sake, and hast
not grown weary. 4 But I have this against thee, that thou didst leave thy
first :love. 5 Remember therefore whence thou art fallen, and repent and do
the first works; else I come to thee, and will move thy :lampstand out of
its :place, except thou repent. 6 But this thou hast, that thou hatest the
works of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate. 7 Who hath an ear, let him hear
what the Spirit saith to the churches. To him that overcometh, to him will I
give to eat of the tree of :life, which is in the Paradise of :God.
8 And to the angel :of the church in Smyrna write:
These things saith the first and the last, who became dead, and lived:
9 I know thy :tribulation, and :poverty (but thou art rich), and the blasphemy
from them that say they are Jews, and are not, but are :Satan’s synagogue.
10 Fear not what things thou art about to suffer: lo, the devil is about to cast
some of you into prison, that ye may be tried and have a tribulation of ten
days. Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee the crown of :life.
11 Who hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith to the churches. Who
overcometh shall in no wise be hurt of the second death.
12 And to the angel :of the church in Pergamos write:
These things saith he that hath the sharp :two-edged :sword: 13 I
know where thou dwellest, where the throne of Satan is; and thou holdest
fast my :name, and didst not deny my :faith, even in the days of Antipas
my :witness, my faithful one, who was killed among you, where :Satan
dwelleth. 14 But I have a few things against thee, because thou hast there
some holding the teaching of Balaam, who taught :Balak to put a stumbling
block before the sons of Israel, to eat things sacrificed to idols, and to
commit fornication. 15 Thus hast thou also some holding the teaching of
Nicolaitans likewise. 16 Repent therefore; else I come to thee quickly, and I
will war against them with the sword of my :mouth. 17 Who hath an ear, let
him hear what the Spirit saith to the churches. To him that overcometh, to
him will I give of the hidden :manna, and I will give him a white stone, and
upon the stone a new name written, which no one knoweth but he that
receiveth it.
18 And to the angel of the church in Thyatira write:
These things saith the Son of :God, who hath his :eyes as a flame of
fire, and his :feet like burnished brass: 19 I know thy :works, and the love
and the faith and the ministry and thy :patience, and thy :last :works are
more than the first. 20 But I have against thee, that thou sufferest the
woman Jezebel, who calleth herself prophetess; and she teacheth and
seduceth my :bondmen to commit fornication, and to eat idol sacrifices.
21 And I gave her time to repent; and she willeth not to repent of
her :fornication. 22 Lo, I cast her into a bed, and them that commit adultery
with her into great tribulation, except they repent of her :works. 23 And I will
kill her :children with death; and all the churches shall know that I am he that
searcheth reins and hearts: and I will give to each of you according to
your :works. 24 But to you I say, to the rest :in Thyatira, as many as have
not this :teaching, who know not the depths of :Satan, as they are saying, I
lay on you no other burden. 25 Nevertheless what ye have, hold fast till I
come. 26 And who overcometh, and who keepeth my :works unto the end,
to him will I give authority over the nations: 27 and he shall rule them with a
rod of iron, as the potter’s vessels are broken to shivers; as I also have
received of my :Father: 28 and I will give him the morning :star. 29 Who hath
an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith to the churches.

Chapter 3
1 And to the angel :of the church in Sardis write:
These things saith he that hath the seven Spirits of :God, and the
seven stars: I know thy :works, that thou hast a name that thou livest, and
art dead. 2 Become watchful, and establish the things remaining, which
were about to die: for I have not found thy works perfected before my :God.
3 Remember therefore how thou hast received and didst hear; and keep it,
and repent. If therefore thou shalt not watch, I will come as a thief, and thou
shalt in no wise know what hour I will come upon thee. 4 But thou hast a few
names in Sardis that did not defile their :garments: and they shall walk with
me in white; because they are worthy. 5 Who overcometh shall thus be
arrayed in white garments; and I will in no wise blot his :name out of the
book of :life, and I will confess his :name before my :Father, and before
his :angels. 6 Who hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith to the
churches.
7 And to the angel :of the church in Philadelphia write:
These things saith the holy one, the true, that hath the key of David,
who openeth and none shall shut, and who shutteth and none openeth: 8 I
know thy :works (lo, I have set before thee a door opened, which none can
shut it), that thou hast a little power, and didst keep my :word, and didst not
deny my :name. 9 Lo, I give of the synagogue of :Satan, of them that say
they are Jews, and are not, but lie; lo, I will make them to come and worship
before thy :feet, and to know that I have loved thee. 10 Because thou didst
keep the word of my patience, I also will keep thee from the hour of the trial,
which hour is to come upon the whole inhabited earth, to try them that dwell
upon the earth. 11 I come quickly: hold fast what thou hast, that no one take
thy :crown. 12 Who overcometh, I will make him a pillar in the temple of
my :God, and he shall go out thence no more: and I will write upon him the
name of my :God, and the name of the city of my :God, the new Jerusalem,
which cometh down out of the heaven from my :God, and my :new :name.
13 Who hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith to the churches.
14 And to the angel of the church in Laodicea write:
These things saith the Amen, the faithful and the true :witness, the
beginning of the creation :of God: 15 I know thy :works, that thou art neither
cold nor hot: I would thou wert cold or hot. 16 So because thou art lukewarm,
and neither hot nor cold, I am about to spew thee out of my :mouth.
17 Because thou sayest [that], I am rich, and have become rich, and have
need of nothing; and knowest not that thou art the wretched and miserable
and poor and blind and naked: 18 I counsel thee to buy of me gold refined by
fire, that thou be rich; and white garments, that thou be clothed and the
shame of thy :nakedness be not manifested, :and eyesalve to anoint
thine :eyes, that thou see. 19 As many as I love, I reprove and chasten: be
zealous therefore, and repent. 20 Lo, I stand at the door and knock: if any
hear my :voice and open the door, I will come in unto him, and will sup with
him, and he with me. 21 Who overcometh, I will give to him to sit down with
me in my :throne, as I also overcame, and sat down with my :Father in
his :throne. 22 Who hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith to the
churches.

Chapter 4
1 After these things I saw, and lo, a door opened in the heaven, and
the first :voice that I heard, as a trump speaking with me, one saying, Come
up hither, and I will show thee what things must come to pass. 2 After these
things I was straightway in the Spirit: and lo, a throne was set in the heaven,
and one sitting upon the throne; 3 and who sat was to look upon like a jasper
stone and a sardius: and a rainbow round the throne, like an emerald to look
upon. 4 And round the throne four and twenty thrones: and upon the
thrones I saw four and twenty elders sitting, arrayed in white garments; and
upon their :heads golden crowns. 5 And out of the throne proceed
lightnings and voices and thunders. And seven lamps of fire were burning
before the throne, which are the seven Spirits of :God; 6 and before the
throne, as if a glassy sea like crystal; and midst the throne, and round the
throne, four living beings full of eyes before and behind. 7 And the
first :living being was like a lion, and the second living being like a calf, and
the third living being had a face as of a man, and the fourth living being was
like a flying eagle. 8 And the four living beings having each one of them six
wings, are full of eyes around and within: and they have no rest day and
night, saying,
Holy, holy, holy, Lord :God, :Almighty, who was and who is and who
is coming.
9 And whenever the living beings shall give glory and honor and
thanks to him that sitteth on the throne, to him that liveth unto the ages of
the ages, 10 the twenty-four elders shall fall down before him that sitteth on
the throne, and shall worship him that liveth unto the ages of the ages, and
shall cast their :crowns before the throne, saying,
11 Worthy art thou, our :Lord and :God, to receive the glory
and the honor and the power: because thou didst create :all
things, and because of thy :will they were, and were created.

Chapter 5
1 And I saw on the right hand of him that sat on the throne a booklet
writ within and on the back, close sealed with seven seals. 2 And I saw a
strong angel proclaiming with a great voice, Who is worthy to open the
booklet, and to break its seals? 3 And no one in the heaven, or on the earth,
or under the earth could open the booklet, or look thereon. 4 And I wept
much, because no one was found worthy to open the booklet, or to look
thereon: 5 and one of the elders saith to me, Weep not; lo, the Lion, he of
the tribe of Judah, the Root of David, hath overcome to open the booklet
and the seven seals thereof. 6 And I saw amidst the throne and the four
living beings, and amidst the elders, a Lamb standing, as if slain, having
seven horns, and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of :God, sent
forth into all the earth. 7 And he came, and he took it out of the right hand of
him that sat on the throne. 8 And when he had taken the booklet, the four
living beings and the four and twenty elders fell down before the Lamb,
having each a harp, and golden bowls full of incenses, which are the
prayers of the saints. 9 And they sing a new song, saying;
Worthy art thou to take the booklet, and to open the seals
thereof; because thou wast slain, and didst purchase to :God
with thy :blood men of every tribe, and tongue, and people,
and nation, 10 and madest them a kingdom and priests to
our :God; and they reign upon the earth.
11 And I saw, and I heard a voice of many angels round the throne and the
living beings and the elders; and the number of them was ten thousands of
ten thousands, and thousands of thousands; 12 saying with a great voice,
Worthy is the Lamb :slain to receive the power, and riches,
and wisdom, and might, and honor, and glory, and blessing.
13 And everything created which is in the heaven, and on the earth, and
under the earth, and on the sea, and all the things in them, heard I saying,
To him that sitteth on the throne, and to the Lamb, the
blessing, and the honor, and the glory, and the might unto the
ages of the ages.
14 And the four living beings said, Amen. And the elders fell down and
worshipped.

Chapter 6
1 And I saw when the Lamb opened one of the seven seals, and I
heard one of the four living beings saying as with a voice of thunder, Come.
2 And I saw, and lo, a white horse, and who sat thereon had a bow; and a
crown was given him: and he came forth conquering, and to conquer.
3 And when he opened the second :seal, I heard the second living being
saying, Come. 4 And another came forth, a red horse: and to the one sitting
thereon it was given [him] to take the peace from the earth, and that they
should slay one another: and a great sword was given him. 5 And when
he opened the third :seal, I heard the third living being saying, Come. And I
saw, and lo, a black horse; and who sat thereon had a balance in his :hand.
6 And I heard as a voice amidst the four living beings saying, A quart of
wheat for a shilling, and three quarts of barley for a shilling, and the oil and
the wine hurt thou not. 7 And when he opened the fourth :seal, I heard
the voice of the fourth living being saying, Come. 8 And I saw, and lo, a pale
horse: and who sat upon him, his name was :Death; and :Hades followed
with him. And authority was given them over the fourth of the earth, to kill
with sword, and with famine, and with death, and by the beasts of the earth.
9 And when he opened the fifth :seal, I saw underneath the altar the
souls of the slain for the word of :God, and for the testimony which they held:
10 and they cried with a great voice, saying, How long, :Master, the holy and
true, dost thou not judge and avenge our :blood on them that dwell on the
earth? 11 And to each of them a white robe was given; and it was said to
them, that they should rest yet a little time, until their :fellow-bondmen also
and their :brethren, who are to be killed even as they, be fulfilled in number.
12 And I saw when he opened the sixth :seal, and there was a great
earthquake; and the sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the whole
moon became as blood; 13 and the stars of the heaven fell to the earth, as a
fig tree shaken of a great wind casteth her unripe figs. 14 And the heaven
was removed as a scroll when rolled up; and every mountain and island
were moved out of their :places. 15 And the kings of the earth, and the
magnates, and the chief captains, and the rich, and the strong, and every
one bond and free, hid themselves into the caves and into the rocks of the
mountains; 16 and they say to the mountains and to the rocks, Fall upon us,
and hide us from the face of the one sitting on the throne, and from the
wrath of the Lamb: 17 because the great :day of their :wrath is come; and
who can stand?

Chapter 7
1 After this I saw four angels standing at the four corners of the earth,
holding the four winds of the earth, that no wind blow on the earth, or on the
sea, or upon any tree. 2 And I saw another angel ascend from the sunrising,
having the living God’s seal: and he cried with a great voice to the four
angels to whom it was given to [them] to hurt the earth and the sea, 3 saying,
Hurt not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, till we shall have sealed the
bondmen of our :God on their :foreheads. 4 And I heard the number of the
sealed, a hundred and forty-four thousand, sealed out of every tribe of
Israel’s sons:
5 Of Judah’s tribe were sealed twelve thousand;
Of Reuben’s tribe twelve thousand;
Of Gad’s tribe twelve thousand;
6 Of Asher’s tribe twelve thousand;
Of Naphtali’s tribe twelve thousand;
Of Manasseh’s tribe twelve thousand;
7 Of Simeon’s tribe twelve thousand;
Of Levi’s tribe twelve thousand;
Of Issachar’s tribe twelve thousand;
8 Of Zebulun’s tribe twelve thousand;
Of Joseph’s tribe twelve thousand;
Of Benjamin’s tribe were sealed twelve thousand.
9 After these things I saw, and lo, a great multitude, which no one
could number [it] out of every nation and of all tribes and peoples and
tongues, standing before the throne and before the Lamb, arrayed in white
robes, and palms in their :hands; 10 and they cry with a great voice, saying,
The salvation to our :God who sitteth on the throne, and to the
Lamb.
11 And all the angels were standing round the throne, and the elders and the
four living beings; and fell before the throne on their :faces, and
worshipped :God, 12 saying,
Amen: The blessing, and the glory, and the wisdom, and the
thanksgiving, and the honor, and the power, and the strength,
unto our :God unto the ages of the ages. Amen.
13 And one of the elders answered, saying to me, These arrayed in the
white :robes, who are they, and whence came they? 14 And I said to him,
My lord, THOU knowest. And he spake to me, These are they that come out
of the great :tribulation, and they washed their :robes, and made them white
in the blood of the Lamb. 15 Therefore are they before the throne of :God
and serve him day and night in his :sanctuary: and who sitteth on the throne
shall tabernacle over them. 16 They shall hunger no more, nor thirst any
more; neither shall the sun strike upon them, nor any heat: 17 because the
Lamb that is amidst the throne shall shepherd them, and guide them unto
fountains of waters of life: and :God shall wipe away every tear from
their :eyes.

Chapter 8
1 And when he opened the seventh :seal, silence was in the heaven
for about half an hour. 2 And I saw the seven angels that stand before :God;
and seven trumpets were given them. 3 And another angel came and
stood over the altar, having a golden censer; and much incense was given
him that he should add it to the prayers of all the saints upon the
golden :altar which was before the throne. 4 And the smoke of the incense
for the prayers of the saints went up before :God out of the angel’s hand.
5 And the angel took the censer; and filled it from the fire of the altar, and
cast it unto the earth: and thunders came, and voices, and lightnings, and
an earthquake. 6 And the seven angels that had the seven trumps
prepared themselves to trump.
7 And the first trumped, and there was hail and fire, mingled with
blood, and it was cast unto the earth: and the third of the earth was burnt up,
and the third of the trees was burnt up, and all green grass was burnt up.
8 And the second angel trumped, and as if a great mountain burning with
fire was cast into the sea: and the third of the sea became blood; 9 and the
third of the creatures which were in the sea died, they that had souls; and
the third of the ships were destroyed. 10 And the third angel trumped,
and a great star fell from the heaven, burning as a torch, and fell upon the
third of the rivers, and upon the fountains of the waters; 11 and the name of
the star is called :Wormwood: and the third of the waters became
wormwood; and many :men died of the waters, because they were made
bitter. 12 And the fourth angel trumped, and the third part of the sun was
smitten, and the third of the moon, and the third of the stars; that the third of
them should be darkened, and the day should not shine for the third of it,
and the night likewise.
13 And I saw, and I heard one eagle, flying in mid heaven, saying with
a great voice, Woe, woe, woe, for the earth-dweller by reason of the
remaining voices of the trumpet of the three angels, who are yet to trump.

Chapter 9
1 And the fifth angel trumped, and I saw a star from :heaven fallen
unto the earth: and the key of the pit of the abyss was given him. 2 And he
opened the pit of the abyss; and smoke went up out of the pit, as smoke of a
great furnace; and the sun was darkened and the air by the smoke of the pit.
3 And out of the smoke came forth locusts upon the earth; and power was
given them, as the scorpions of the earth have power. 4 And it was said to
them that they should not hurt the grass of the earth, neither aught green,
neither any tree, but only such :men as have not the seal of :God on their
foreheads. 5 And it was given them that they should not kill them, but that
they should be tormented five months: and their :torment was as the
torment of a scorpion, when it striketh a man. 6 And in those :days :men
shall seek :death, and shall in no wise find it; and they shall desire to die,
and :death fleeth from them. 7 And the likenesses of the locusts were like
horses prepared for war; and upon their :heads as if crowns like gold, and
their :faces were as men’s faces. 8 And they had hair as hair of women, and
their :teeth were as of lions. 9 And they had breastplates, as if breastplates
of iron; and the sound of their wings was as a sound of chariots, of many
horses rushing to war. 10 And they have tails like scorpions, and stings; and
in their :tails is their :power to hurt :men five months. 11 They have over
them as king the angel of the abyss: his name in Hebrew is Abaddōn, and in
the Greek he hath the name Destroyer. 12 The one :Woe is gone: lo,
yet two Woes come hereafter.
13 And the sixth angel trumped, and I heard one voice from the horns
of the golden :altar :before :God, 14 one saying to the sixth angel that had
the trumpet, Loose the four angels :bound at the great :river Euphrates.
15 And the four angels were loosed, those prepared for the hour and day
and month and year, that they should kill the third of :men. 16 And the
number of the armies of the horsemen was twice ten thousands of ten
thousands: I heard their :number. 17 And thus I saw the horses in the vision,
and them that sat on them, having breastplates as of fire and hyacinth and
brimstone: and the heads of the horses are as heads of lions; and out of
their :mouths proceedeth fire and smoke and brimstone. 18 By these
three :plagues was the third of :men killed, by the fire and the smoke and the
brimstone which proceeded out of their :mouths. 19 For the power of the
horses is in their :mouth, and in their :tails: for their :tails are like serpents,
and have heads; and with them they hurt. 20 And the rest of :men who were
not killed with these :plagues repented not of the works of their :hands, that
they should not worship the demons, and the idols :of gold, and :of silver,
and :of brass, and :of stone, and of :wood; which can neither see, nor hear,
nor walk: 21 and they repented not of their :murders, nor of their :sorceries,
nor of their :fornication, nor of their :thefts.

Chapter 10
1 And I saw another strong angel coming down out of :heaven,
arrayed with a cloud; and the rainbow was upon his :head, and his :face as
the sun, and his :feet as pillars of fire; 2 and he had in his :hand a little book
open: and he set his :right :foot upon the sea, and the left upon the earth;
3 and he cried with a great voice, just as a lion roareth: and when he cried,
the seven thunders spake their :voices. 4 And when the seven thunders
spake, I was about to write: and I heard a voice from :heaven saying, Seal
what things the seven thunders spake, and write them not. 5 And the angel
that I saw standing on the sea and on the earth lifted up his :right :hand
to :heaven, 6 and sware by him that liveth unto the ages of the ages, who
created the heaven and the things therein, and the earth and those therein,
and the sea and those therein, that there shall not be a time any more: 7 but
in the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when he is about to trump,
then is also finished the mystery of :God, according to the good tidings
which he declared to his :bondmen the prophets. 8 And the voice which I
heard from :heaven, I heard again speaking with me, and saying, Go, take
the booklet which is open in the hand of the angel that standeth on the sea
and on the earth. 9 And I went unto the angel, telling him to give me the little
book. And he saith to me, Take, and eat it up; and it shall make thy :belly
bitter, but in thy :mouth it shall be sweet as honey. 10 And I took the little
book out of the hand of the angel, and ate it up; and it was in my :mouth as
sweet as honey: and when I had eaten it, my: belly was made bitter. 11 And
they say to me, Thou must prophesy again over many peoples and nations
and tongues and kings.

Chapter 11
1 And a reed was given me like a rod: one saying, Rise, and measure
the temple of :God, and the altar, and those worshipping therein. 2 And the
court :without the temple leave without, and measure it not; because it hath
been given to the nations: and the holy :city shall they tread under foot forty
and two months. 3 And I will give to my two :witnesses, and they shall
prophesy a thousand two hundred and threescore days, clothed in
sackcloths. 4 These are the two olive trees and the two
lampstands, :standing before the Lord of the earth. 5 And if any desireth to
hurt them, fire proceedeth out of their :mouth and devoureth their :enemies;
and if any shall desire to hurt them, he must thus be killed. 6 These have
the authority to shut the heaven, that it rain not during the days of
their :prophecy: and they have authority over the waters to turn them into
blood, and to smite the earth with every plague, as oft as they shall desire.
7 And when they shall have finished their :testimony, the beast that cometh
up out of the abyss shall make war with them, and overcome them, and kill
them. 8 And their dead :body is on the street of the great :city, the which
spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also their :Lord was crucified.
9 And from among the peoples and tribes and tongues and nations they
look upon their dead :body three days and a half, and suffer not their
dead :bodies to be laid in a tomb. 10 And the dwellers on the earth rejoice
over them, and make merry; and they shall send gifts one to another;
because these two :prophets tormented the dwellers on the earth. 11 And
after the three days and a half the spirit of life from :God entered in them,
and they stood upon their :feet; and great fear fell upon them that beheld
them. 12 And they heard a great voice from the heaven saying to them,
Come up hither. And they went up into :heaven in the cloud; and
their :enemies beheld them. 13 And a great earthquake came in that :hour,
and the tenth of the city fell; and seven thousand names of men were killed
in the earthquake: and the rest were affrighted, and gave glory to the God
of :heaven. 14 The second :Woe is gone: lo, the third :Woe cometh
quickly.
15 And the seventh angel trumped: and great voices in heaven came,
saying,
The kingdom of the world is become our :Lord’s and
his :Christ’s, and he shall reign unto the ages of the ages.
16 And the twenty-four elders, who sit before :God on their :thrones, fell
upon their :faces and worshipped :God, 17 saying,
We thank thee, Lord :God, the Almighty, who is and who was;
because thou hast taken thy :great :power, and didst reign.
18 And the nations were wroth, and thy :wrath came, and the
season of the dead to be judged, and to give their reward to
thy :bondmen the prophets, and to the saints, and to them that
fear thy :name, the small and the great; and to destroy them
that destroy the earth.
19 And the sanctuary of God :in :heaven was opened, and in his sanctuary
the ark of his :covenant was seen; and lightnings came, and voices, and
thunders, and an earthquake, and great hail.

Chapter 12
1 And a great sign was seen in the heaven: a woman arrayed with
the sun, and the moon under her :feet, and on her :head a crown of twelve
stars; 2 and she was with child; and she crieth out, travailing, and in pain to
be delivered. 3 And another sign was seen in the heaven: and lo, a great
red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and upon his :heads seven
diadems. 4 And his :tail draweth the third of the stars of the heaven, and he
cast them to the earth: and the dragon standeth before the woman :about to
be delivered, that when she is delivered he may devour her :child. 5 And
she was delivered of a son, a male, who is to rule all the nations with a rod of
iron: and her :child was caught up unto :God, and unto his :throne. 6 And
the woman fled into the wilderness, where she hath there a place prepared
of :God, that there they may nourish her a thousand two hundred threescore
days. 7 And war was in the heaven: :Michael and his :angels going to
war with the dragon; and the dragon warred and his :angels; 8 and he
prevailed not, neither was their :place found any more in the heaven. 9 And
the great :dragon was cast down, the old :serpent, the one called Devil
and :Satan, who deceiveth of the whole inhabited earth; he was cast down
to the earth, and his :angels were cast down with him. 10 And I heard a
great voice in the heaven, saying,
Now is the salvation, and the power, and the kingdom,
become our God’s, and the authority is become his Christ’s:
for the accuser of our :brethren is cast down, who accuseth
them before our :God day and night. 11 And THEY overcame
him because of the blood of the Lamb, and because of the
word of their :testimony; and they loved not their :life even
unto death. 12 Therefore rejoice, O heavens, and ye that
tabernacle in them. Woe for the earth and the sea, because
the devil is gone down unto you, having great wrath, knowing
that he hath but a short season.
13 And when the dragon saw that he was cast down to the earth, he
persecuted the woman that brought forth the male. 14 And the two wings of
the great :eagle were given to the woman that she fly to the wilderness to
her :place, where she is nourished there for a season, and seasons, and
half a season, from the face of the serpent. 15 And the serpent cast out of
his :mouth after the woman water as a river, that he might cause her to be
carried away by the river. 16 And the earth helped the woman, and the earth
opened her :mouth and swallowed up the river which the dragon cast out of
his :mouth. 17 And the dragon waxed wroth with the woman, and went
away to make war with the rest of her :seed, that keep the commandments
of :God, and hold the testimony of Jesus:

Chapter 13
1 and he stood upon the sand of the sea.
And I saw a beast coming up out of the sea, having ten horns and
seven heads, and on his :horns ten diadems, and upon his :heads names of
blasphemy. 2 And the beast which I saw was like a leopard, and his :feet as
a bear’s, and his :mouth as a lion’s mouth, and the dragon gave him
his :power, and his :throne, and great authority. 3 And I saw one of
his :heads as though it had been smitten unto death; and his :stroke
of :death was healed: and the whole earth wondered after the beast; 4 and
they worshipped the dragon, because he gave the authority to the beast;
and they worshipped the beast, saying, Who is like the beast? and who can
war with him? 5 and a mouth was given him, speaking great things and
blasphemies; and authority was given him to continue forty and two months.
6 And he opened his :mouth for blasphemies against :God, to blaspheme
his :name, and his :tabernacle, them that tabernacle in the heaven. 7 And it
was given him to make war with the saints, and to overcome them: and
authority was given him over every tribe and people and tongue and nation.
8 And all the earth-dwellers shall worship him, every one whose :name hath
not been written in the book of :life of the Lamb :slain from the world’s
foundation. 9 If any hath an ear, let him hear. 10 If any is unto captivity, unto
captivity he goeth: if any shall kill with the sword, with the sword must he be
killed. Here is the patience and the faith of the saints. 11 And I saw
another beast coming up out of the earth; and he had two horns like a lamb,
and he spake as a dragon. 12 And he exerciseth all the authority of the first
beast in his sight. And he maketh the earth and them that dwell therein to
worship the first :beast, whose :stroke of :death was healed. 13 And he
doeth great signs, that he should make even fire to come down out
of :heaven upon the earth in men’s sight. 14 And he deceiveth them that
dwell on the earth with the signs which it was given him to do in the sight of
the beast; saying to them that dwell on the earth, that they should make an
image to the beast who hath the stroke of the sword and lived. 15 And it was
given to her to give a spirit to the image of the beast, that the image of the
beast should both speak and cause that as many as should not worship the
image of the beast should be killed. 16 And he causeth all, the small and the
great, and the rich and the poor, and the free and the bond, that they give
them a mark on their :right :hand or upon their :forehead; 17 and that no one
be able to buy or sell, save who hath the mark, the name of the beast or the
number of his :name. 18 Here is the wisdom. Who hath understanding, let
him count the number of the beast; for it is the number of a man: and
his :number is Six hundred sixty six.

Chapter 14
1 And I saw, and lo, the Lamb standing on the mount Zion, and with
him a hundred and forty-four thousand, having his :name, and the name of
his :Father, writ on their :foreheads. 2 And I heard a voice from :heaven, as
a voice of many waters, and as a voice of a great thunder: and the voice
which I heard was as of harpers harping with their :harps: 3 and they sing as
if a new song before the throne, and before the four living beings and the
elders: and no one could learn the song save the hundred and forty-four
thousand, the purchased out of the earth. 4 These are who were not defiled
with women; for they are virgins. These are who follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goeth. These were purchased from among :men, firstfruit
to :God and to the Lamb. 5 And in their :mouth was found no lie: they are
without blemish.
6 And I saw another angel flying in mid heaven, having an eternal
gospel to proclaim over the earth-dwellers, and over every nation and tribe
and tongue and people; 7 saying with a great voice, Fear :God, and give him
glory; for the hour of his :judgment is come: and worship him that made the
heaven and the earth and sea and fountains of waters. 8 And another,
second angel, followed, saying, Fallen, fallen is Babylon the great, that hath
made all the nations to drink of the wine of the wrath of her :fornication.
9 And another, third angel, followed them, saying with a great voice, If any
worshippeth the beast and his :image, and receiveth a mark on
his :forehead, or upon his :hand, 10 he also shall drink of the wine of the
wrath of :God, mingled unmixed in the cup of his :anger; and he shall be
tormented with fire and brimstone in presence of holy angels, and in
presence of the Lamb: 11 and the smoke of their :torment goeth up unto the
ages of the ages; and they have no rest day and night who worship the
beast and his :image, and whoso receiveth the mark of his :name. 12 Here
is the patience of the saints, those keeping the commandments of :God,
and the faith of Jesus. 13 And I heard a voice from the heaven saying,
Write, Blessed the dead who die in the Lord from henceforth. Yea, saith the
Spirit, that they may rest from their :labors; for their :works follow with them.
14 And I saw, and lo, a white cloud; and on the cloud one sitting like a
son of man, having on his :head a golden crown, and in his :hand a sharp
sickle. 15 And another angel came out from the temple, crying with a
great voice to him that sat on the cloud, Send forth thy :sickle, and reap:
because the hour to reap is come; because the harvest of the earth is
become dry. 16 And who sat on the cloud cast his :sickle upon the earth;
and the earth was reaped. 17 And another angel came out from the
temple :in the heaven, he also having a sharp sickle. 18 And another
angel came out from the altar, the one having power over :fire; and he called
with a great voice to him that had the sharp :sickle, saying, Send forth thy
sharp :sickle, and gather the clusters of the vine of the earth; because
her :grapes are fully ripe. 19 And the angel cast his :sickle into the earth,
and gathered the vintage of the earth, and cast it into the winepress, the
great, of the wrath of :God. 20 And the winepress was trodden without the
city, and blood came out from the winepress, even unto the bridles of the
horses, as far as a thousand and six hundred furlongs.

Chapter 15
1 And I saw another sign in :heaven, great and marvellous, seven
angels having seven plagues, the last, for in them is finished the wrath
of :God. 2 And I saw as if a glassy sea mingled with fire; and those
victorious from the beast and from his image and from the number of
his :name, standing by the glassy sea, having harps of :God. 3 And they
sing the song of Moses the bondman of God, and the song of the Lamb,
saying,
Great and marvellous thy :works, Lord :God, the Almighty;
righteous and true thy :ways, :King of the ages. 4 Who shall
not fear, Lord, and glorify thy :name? for thou only art holy; for
all the nations shall come and worship before thee; for thy
righteous acts have been manifested.
5 And after these things I saw, and the sanctuary of the tabernacle of the
testimony in the heaven was opened: 6 and out came from the sanctuary
the seven angels that had the seven plagues, arrayed with precious stone
pure, bright, and girt about their breasts with golden girdles. 7 And one of
the four living beings gave the seven angels seven golden bowls full of the
wrath of the God who liveth unto the ages of the ages. 8 And the sanctuary
was filled with smoke from the glory of :God, and from his :power; and none
was able to enter into the sanctuary, till the seven plagues of the seven
angels should be finished.

Chapter 16
1 And I heard a great voice out of the temple, saying to the seven angels,
Go, and pour out the seven bowls of the wrath of :God unto the earth.
2 And the first went, and poured out his :bowl unto the earth; and there
came a noisome and grievous sore upon the men that had the mark of the
beast, and that worshipped his :image. 3 And the second poured out
his :bowl into the sea; and it became blood as of one dead; and every living
soul died, the things in the sea. 4 And the third poured out his :bowl into
the rivers and the fountains of the waters; and it became blood. 5 And I
heard the angel of the waters saying, Righteous art thou, who is and who
was, the Holy One, because thou didst thus judge: 6 because they poured
out blood of saints and prophets, and blood hast thou given them to drink;
they deserve it. 7 And I heard the altar saying, Yea, Lord :God, the Almighty,
true and righteous thy judgments. 8 And the fourth poured out his :bowl
upon the sun; and it was given him to scorch :men with fire. 9 And :men
were scorched with great heat: and they blasphemed the name of the God
who hath the power over these :plagues; and they repented not to give him
glory. 10 And the fifth poured out his :bowl upon the throne of the beast;
and his :kingdom became darkened; and they gnawed their :tongues for
pain, 11 and they blasphemed the God of the heaven for their :pains and for
their :sores; and they repented not of their :works. 12 And the sixth
poured out his :bowl upon the river, the great, the Euphrates; and the water
thereof was dried up, that the way be made ready for the kings :from the
sunrising. 13 And I saw coming out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of
the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet, three
unclean spirits, as if frogs: 14 for they are spirits of demons, working signs;
which go forth over the kings of the whole inhabited earth, to gather them
together unto the war of the great :day of God, the Almighty. 15 (Lo, I come
as a thief. Blessed who watcheth, and keepeth his :garments, lest he walk
naked, and they see his :shame.) 16 And they gathered them together into
the place :called in Hebrew Har Magedōn. 17 And the seventh poured
out his :bowl upon the air; and a great voice came forth out of the temple,
from the throne, saying: Done: 18 and there were lightnings, and voices, and
thunders; and there was a great earthquake, such as was not since men
were upon the earth, so great an earthquake, so mighty. 19 And the
great :city was divided into three parts, and the cities of the nations fell: and
Babylon the great was remembered before :God, to give her the cup of the
wine of the anger of his :wrath. 20 And every island fled, and mountains
were not found. 21 And great hail, stones about a talent weight, cometh
down out of :heaven upon :men: and :men blasphemed :God for the plague
of the hail; because the plague thereof is exceeding great.

Chapter 17
1 And one out of the seven angels that had the seven bowls came
and spake with me, saying, Hither, I will show thee the judgment of the
great :harlot that sitteth upon many waters; 2 with whom the kings of the
earth committed fornication, and the dwellers on the earth were made
drunken with the wine of her :fornication. 3 And he carried me away in Spirit
into a wilderness: and I saw a woman sitting upon a scarlet beast, full of
names of blasphemy, he having seven heads and ten horns. 4 And the
woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet, and gilded with gold and precious
stone and pearls, having in her :hand a golden cup full of abominations, and
the unclean things of her :fornication, 5 and upon her :forehead a name
written, a mystery, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF THE HARLOTS
AND OF THE ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH. 6 And I saw the woman drunk
with the blood of the saints, and with the blood of the witnesses of Jesus.
And when I saw her, I wondered with a great wonder. 7 And the angel said
to me, Wherefore didst thou wonder? I will tell thee the mystery of the
woman, and of the beast that carrieth her, which hath the seven heads and
the ten horns. 8 The beast that thou sawest was, and is not; and is about to
come up out of the abyss, and he goeth unto destruction. And the dwellers
on the earth shall wonder, they whose name hath not been written upon the
little book of :life from the world’s foundation, when they behold the beast,
how that he was, and is not, and shall be present. 9 Here is the mind that
hath wisdom. The seven heads are seven mountains, where the woman
sitteth on them: 10 and the kings are seven; the five are fallen, the one is,
the other is not yet come; and when he do come, he must continue a little
while. 11 And the beast that was, and is not, is himself also an eighth, and is
of the seven, and goeth unto destruction. 12 And the ten horns that thou
sawest are ten kings, who have received no kingdom as yet; but receive
authority as kings with the beast one hour. 13 These have one mind, and
they give their :power and authority to the beast. 14 These shall war against
the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them, for he is Lord of lords, and
King of kings; and they with him called and chosen and faithful. 15 And he
saith to me, The waters which thou sawest, where the harlot sitteth, are
peoples, and crowds, and nations, and tongues. 16 And the ten horns which
thou sawest, and the beast, these shall hate the harlot, and shall make her
desolate and naked, and shall eat her :flesh, and shall burn her utterly with
fire. 17 For :God did put in their :hearts to do his :mind, and to come to one
mind, and to give their :kingdom to the beast, until the words of :God should
be accomplished. 18 And the woman whom thou sawest is the great :city,
which hath kingship over the kings of the earth.

Chapter 18
1 After these things I saw another angel coming down out of :heaven,
having great authority; and the earth was lightened with his :glory. 2 And he
cried with a mighty voice, saying, Fallen, fallen is Babylon the great, and is
become a habitation of demons, and prison of every unclean spirit, and
prison of every unclean and hateful bird. 3 For by the wine of the wrath of
her :fornication all the nations are fallen, and the kings of the earth
committed fornication with her, and the merchants of the earth waxed rich
by the power of her :luxury. 4 And I heard another voice from :heaven,
saying Come forth, my :people, out of her, that ye have no fellowship with
her :sins, and that ye receive not of her :plagues: 5 for her :sins are heaped
up even unto :heaven, and :God hath remembered her :iniquities. 6 Render
to her even as she rendered, and redouble to her according to her :works: in
the cup which she mingled, mingle to her double. 7 However much she
glorified herself, and waxed luxurious, so much give her of torment and
mourning: because she saith in her heart [that], I sit as queen, and am no
widow, and shall in no wise see mourning. 8 Therefore in one day shall her
plagues :come, death, and mourning, and famine; and she shall be utterly
burned with fire; for strong is the Lord :God who judged her. 9 And the kings
of the earth, who committed fornication with her and lived luxuriously, shall
weep and wail over her, when they shall see the smoke of her :burning,
10 standing afar off for the fear of her :torment, saying, Woe, woe, the
great :city, Babylon, the strong :city! for in one hour is thy :judgment come.
11 And the merchants of the earth weep and mourn over her, for no one
buyeth their :cargo any more; 12 cargo of gold, and silver, and precious
stone, and pearls, and fine linen, and purple, and silk, and scarlet; and all
thyine wood, and every vessel of ivory, and every vessel made of most
precious wood, and of brass, and iron, and marble; 13 and cinnamon, and
spice, and incenses, and ointment, and frankincense, and wine, and oil, and
fine flour, and grain, and cattle, and sheep; and of horses and chariots and
bodies; and souls of men. 14 And the fruits of the lust of thy soul are gone
from thee, and all the dainty and the sumptuous are perished from thee, and
men shall find them no more at all. 15 The merchants of these things, who
became rich by her, shall stand afar off for the fear of her :torment, weeping
and mourning; 16 saying, Woe, woe, the great :city, the one arrayed in fine
linen and purple and scarlet, and gilded with gold and precious stone and
pearl! 17 because in one hour so great :riches is made desolate. And every
shipmaster, and every one that saileth any whither, and mariners, and as
many as work on the sea, stood afar off, 18 and cried as they looked upon
the smoke of her :burning, saying, What city is like the great :city? 19 And
they did cast dust upon their :heads, and cried, weeping and mourning,
saying, Woe, woe, the great :city, wherein all that had their ships in the sea
became rich from her :costliness! for in one hour is she made desolate.
20 Rejoice over her, O heaven, and ye the saints, and the apostles, and the
prophets; for :God hath judged your :judgment on her. 21 And one
strong angel took up a stone as if a great millstone and cast it into the sea,
saying, Thus with a mighty rush shall Babylon, the great city, be cast down,
and shall be found no more at all. 22 And the voice of harpers and minstrels
and fluteplayers and trumpeters shall be heard no more at all in thee; and
no craftsman, of whatever craft, shall be found any more at all in thee; and
the noise of a mill shall be heard no more at all in thee; 23 and the light of a
lamp shall shine no more at all in thee; and the voice of bridegroom and
bride shall be heard no more at all in thee: because thy :merchants were the
princes of the earth; because with thy :sorcery were all the nations deceived.
24 And in her was found blood of prophets and of saints, and of all the slain
upon the earth.

Chapter 19
1 After these things I heard as if a loud voice of a great crowd in the
heaven, saying,
Hallēlujah; the salvation and the glory, and the power are
our :God’s: 2 because true and righteous are his :judgments;
because he hath judged the great harlot, she that corrupted
the earth with her :fornication, and he hath avenged the blood
of his :bondmen at her hand.
3 And a second time they said, Hallelujah. And her :smoke goeth up unto
the ages of the ages. 4 And the twenty-four :elders and the four living
beings fell down and worshipped the God that sitteth on the throne, saying,
Amen; Hallelujah. 5 And a voice came forth from the throne, saying,
Praise our :God, all ye his :bondmen that fear him, the small
and the great.
6 And I heard as if a voice of a great crowd, and as a voice of many waters,
and as a voice of mighty thunders, saying,
Hallelujah: for the Lord our :God, the Almighty, reigneth. 7 Let
us rejoice and be exceeding glad, and we will give him the
glory: for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his :wife hath
made herself ready. 8 And it was given her that she array
herself in fine linen bright, pure: for the fine linen is the
righteous acts of the saints.
9 And he saith to me, Write, Blessed those bidden to the marriage supper of
the Lamb. And he saith to me, These are the true words of :God. 10 And I
fell down before his :feet to worship him. And he saith to me, See, not so: I
am a fellow-bondman with thee and thy :brethren that hold the testimony of
Jesus: worship :God: for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of :prophecy.
11 And I saw the heaven opened; and lo, a white horse, and he that sat
thereon is called Faithful and True; and in righteousness doth he judge and
war. 12 And his :eyes are flame of fire, and on his :head are many diadems;
having a name written which no one knoweth but he. 13 And he is arrayed
in a garment sprinkled with blood: and his :name is called The Word of :God.
14 And the armies which are in the heaven followed him upon white horses,
clothed in fine linen, white, pure. 15 And out of his :mouth proceedeth a
sharp sword, wherewith to smite the nations: and HE shall rule them with a
rod of iron: and HE treadeth the press of the wine of the fierceness of the
wrath of :God, the Almighty. 16 And he hath upon the garment and upon
his :thigh a name written, KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS.
17 And I saw one angel standing in the sun; and he cried with a loud
voice, saying to all the birds that fly in mid heaven, Come and be gathered
together unto the great supper of :God; 18 that ye may eat flesh of kings,
and flesh of captains, and flesh of mighty men, and flesh of horses and their
riders, and flesh of all, both free and bond, and small and great. 19 And
I saw the beast, and the kings of the earth, and their :armies, gathered to
make :war against him that sat upon the horse, and against his :army.
20 And the beast was taken, and with him the false prophet that wrought the
signs in his sight, wherewith he deceived them that had received the mark
of the beast and them that worshipped his :image: they two were cast alive
into the lake of :fire that burneth with brimstone: 21 and the rest were killed
with the horseman’s sword, which came forth out of his :mouth: and all the
birds were filled with their :flesh.

Chapter 20
1 And I saw an angel coming down out of the heaven, having the key
of the abyss and a great chain over his :hand. 2 And he laid hold on the
dragon, the old :serpent, who is the Devil and :Satan, and bound him for a
thousand years, 3 and cast him into the abyss, and shut it, and sealed it
over him, that he should deceive the nations no more, until the thousand
years should be finished: thereafter he must be loosed for a little time.
4 And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given to
them: and I saw the souls of those beheaded for the testimony of Jesus, and
for the word of :God, and such as worshipped not the beast, neither
his :image, and received not the mark upon their forehead and upon
their :hand; and they lived, and reigned with the Christ a thousand years.
5 The rest of the dead lived not until the thousand years should be finished.
This is the first :resurrection. 6 Blessed and holy who hath part in the
first :resurrection: over these the second death hath no authority; but they
shall be priests of :God and of the Christ, and shall reign with him the
thousand years. 7 And when the thousand years are finished, :Satan
shall be loosed out of his :prison, 8 and shall come forth to deceive the
nations, those in the four corners of the earth, :Gōg and Magōg, to gather
them together to the war: the number of whom is as the sand of the sea.
9 And they went up over the breadth of the earth, and surrounded the camp
of the saints, and the beloved :city: and fire came down out of the heaven,
and devoured them. 10 And the devil that deceived them was cast into the
lake of :fire and :brimstone, where are also the beast and the false prophet;
and they shall be tormented day and night unto the ages of the ages.
11 And I saw a great white throne, and him that sat thereon, from
whose :face the earth and the heaven fled away; and no place was found for
them. 12 And I saw the dead, the great and the small, standing before the
throne; and booklets were opened: and another booklet was opened, which
is that of :life: and the dead were judged out of the things written in the
booklets, according to their :works. 13 And the sea gave up the dead that
were in it; and :death and :Hades gave up the dead :in them: and they were
judged each according to their :works. 14 And :death and :Hades were cast
into the lake of :fire. This is the second :death, the lake of :fire. 15 And if any
was not found written in the book of :life, he was cast into the lake of :fire.

Chapter 21
1 And I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and
the first earth are gone; and the sea is no more. 2 And I saw the holy :city
Jerusalem new coming down out of :heaven from :God, made ready as a
bride adorned for her :husband. 3 And I heard a great voice out of the
throne saying, Lo, the tabernacle of :God is with :men, and he shall
tabernacle with them, and THEY shall be his peoples, and :God himself shall
be with them: 4 and he shall wipe away every tear from their :eyes; and:
death shall be no more; neither shall there be mourning, nor crying, nor pain,
any more: the first things are gone. 5 And who sitteth on the throne said, Lo,
I make all things new. And he saith, Write: because these :words are
faithful and true. 6 And he said to me, They are come to pass. I am the
Alpha and the Ō, the beginning and the end. I will give to the one athirst of
the fountain of the water of :life freely. 7 Who overcometh shall inherit these
things; and I will be God to him, and he shall be son to me. 8 But for the
fearful, and unbelieving, and abominable, and murderers, and fornicators,
and sorcerers, and idolaters and all :liars, their :part is in the lake that
burneth with fire and brimstone; which is the second death.
9 And one of the seven angels came who had the seven bowls, who
were laden with the seven :last plagues; and spake with me, saying, Hither,
I will show thee the bride, the wife of the Lamb. 10 And he carried me away
in Spirit to a mountain great and high, and showed me the holy :city
Jerusalem, coming down out of the heaven from :God, 11 having the glory
of :God: her luminary was like unto a stone most precious, as a jasper stone,
clear as crystal: 12 having a wall great and high; having twelve gates, and at
the gates twelve angels; and names written thereon, which are those of the
twelve tribes, of Israel’s sons. 13 On the east were three gates; and on the
north three gates; and on the south three gates; and on the west three gates.
14 And the wall of the city had twelve foundations, and on them twelve
names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb. 15 And who spake with me had
for a measure a golden reed to measure the city, and the gates thereof, and
the wall thereof. 16 And the city lieth four-square, and the length thereof is
as great as the breadth: and he measured the city with the reed, twelve
thousand furlongs: the length and the breadth and the height thereof are
equal. 17 And he measured the wall thereof, a hundred and forty-four cubits
by man’s measure, that is, an angel’s. 18 And the building of the wall
thereof was jasper; and the city was pure gold like unto pure glass. 19 The
foundations of the wall of the city were adorned with every precious stone.
The first :foundation was jasper; the second, sapphire; the third, chalcedony;
the fourth, emerald; 20 the fifth, sardonyx; the sixth, sardius; the seventh,
gold stone; the eighth, beryl; the ninth, topaz; the tenth, gold leek; the
eleventh, jacinth; the twelfth, amethyst. 21 And the twelve gates were
twelve pearls; each one of the several gates was of one pearl: and the street
of the city was pure gold, transparent as glass. 22 And I saw no sanctuary
therein: for the Lord :God the Almighty is the sanctuary thereof, and the
Lamb. 23 And the city hath no need of the sun, neither of the moon, to shine
upon it: for the glory of :God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the lamp thereof.
24 And the nations shall walk by the :light thereof: and the kings of the earth
bring their :glory into it. 25 And the gates thereof shall in no wise be shut by
day (for no night shall be there): 26 and they shall bring the glory and the
honor of the nations into it: 27 and in no wise shall enter into it anything
unclean, or who maketh an abomination and a lie: but only those written in
the Lamb’s :book of :life.

Chapter 22
1 And he showed me a river of water of life, bright as crystal, proceeding out
of the throne of :God and of the Lamb, 2 amidst the street thereof. And on
this side of the river and on that was a tree of life, bearing twelve fruits,
yielding its :fruit each month: and the leaves of the tree were for curing the
nations. 3 And there shall be no more curse, and the throne of :God and of
the Lamb shall be therein: and his :bondmen shall serve him, 4 and shall
see his :face; and his :name shall be on their :foreheads. 5 And night shall
be no more; and they have no need of light of lamp, nor light of sun; for the
Lord :God shall give them light: and they shall reign unto the ages of the
ages.
6 And he said to me, These :words are faithful and true: and the Lord,
the God of the spirits of the prophets, sent his :angel to show to
his :bondmen what things must come to pass with speed. 7 And lo, I come
speedily. Blessed who keepeth the words of the prophecy of this :book.
8 And I John am he who heareth and seeth these things. And when I heard
and saw, I fell down to worship before the feet of the angel that showed me
these things. 9 And he saith to me, See, not so. I am fellow-bondman of
thee and thy :brethren the prophets, and them that keep the words of
this :booklet: worship :God. 10 And he saith to me, Seal not the words
of the prophecy of this :booklet; for the season is nigh. 11 Who is
unrighteous, let him be unrighteous still: and who is filthy, let him be made
filthy still: and who is righteous, let him do righteousness still: and who is
holy, let him be made holy still. 12 Lo, I come speedily; and my :reward is
with me, to render to each according as his :work is. 13 I am the Alpha and
the Ō, the first and the last, the beginning and the end. 14 Blessed they that
wash their :robes, that theirs shall be the authority over the tree of :life, and
they may enter by the gates into the city. 15 Without are the dogs, and the
sorcerers, and the fornicators, and the murderers, and the idolators, and
every one that loveth and maketh a lie.
16 I Jesus have sent mine :angel to witness to you these things over
the churches. I am the root and the offspring of David, the bright, the
morning :star.
17 And the Spirit and the bride say, Come. And who heareth, let him
say, Come. And who thirsteth, let him come: who willeth, let him take water
of life freely.
18 I testify unto every one that heareth the words of the prophecy of
this :booklet, If any shall add to them, God shall add to him the
plagues :written in this :booklet: 19 and if any shall take away from the words
of the booklet of this :prophecy :God shall take away his :part from the tree
of :life, and out of the holy :city, which are written in this :booklet.
20 Who testifieth these things saith, Yea: I come quickly. Amen:
come, Lord Jesus.
21 The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with the saints.